Title: Drag reduction regimes in air lubrication

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17636v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 01:54:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
> Under consideration for publication in J. Fluid Mech.

Banner appropriate to article type will appear here in typeset article 

# Drag reduction regimes in air lubrication 

Lina Nikolaidou 1, Ali R Khojasteh 1, Angeliki Laskari 1, Tom van Terwisga 2,3 and Christian Poelma 1

> 1

Process & Energy, Faculty Mechanical Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 2, Delft 2628 CD, The Netherlands 

> 2

Maritime and Transport Technology, Faculty Mechanical Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 2, Delft 2628 CD, The Netherlands 

> 3

Maritime Research Institude of the Netherlands (MARIN), Haagsteeg 2, Wageningen, 6708 PM, The Netherlands 

Corresponding author: Lina Nikolaidou, m.nikolaidou@tudelft.nl (Received xx; revised xx; accepted xx) 

Air lubrication regimes were studied using simultaneous drag force measurements and multi-plane imaging to characterize the regimes and identify the governing mechanisms of drag reduction. A bubbly, transitional, and air layer regime are identified over a large range of freestream velocities ( 𝑈 ∞), air flow rates ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 ), and Froude-depth numbers ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ). For the lowest 𝑈 ∞, drag reduction lags significantly behind the non-wetted area coverage at all cases and no simple correlation exists. Within the bubbly regime, a drag increase is found for low 𝑈 ∞ with large, slow-moving bubbles forming a single layer over the plate height. For higher velocities, bubbles become smaller and disperse vertically, while the drag starts decreasing. For higher 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 , irrespective of 𝑈 ∞, air patches start to form (transitional regime) and drag monotonically decreases, with the onset of the air layer regime at 60% drag reduction. A new scaling of the associated critical 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 is proposed, combining the air exit velocity, the liquid velocity close to the air layer and 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 . For a further increase of 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 and low 𝑈 ∞, a thicker and smoother air layer is formed with even lower drag; for higher 𝑈 ∞, marginal differences are observed. The air layer morphology is significantly altered however, depending on 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 : for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 0.7, it is unbounded, extending beyond the current test section length, and for subcritical conditions (deep water regime, 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 0.61) a closure is formed and the air layer transitions to a cavity of a specific length. 

Key words: bubble dynamics, drag reduction, gas-liquid flows 

1. Introduction 

Drag reduction by air lubrication is one of the techniques applied to reduce frictional resistance beneath a ship’s hull. Despite the fact that this technology has already been extensively studied and implemented on ships, the physical mechanisms responsible for 

Abstract must not spill onto p.2 0 X0-1 

> arXiv:2604.17636v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 19 Apr 2026

Nikolaidou et al. 

drag reduction are still not fully understood. As a result, discrepancies persist between model-scale and full-scale results, and reliable scaling laws have yet to be established. This is partly due to the complex multiphase nature of these flows and the difficulty of performing experiments or numerical simulations at the high Reynolds numbers relevant to full-scale conditions. Better understanding these flows could lead to improved designs of air lubrication systems that target specific operating conditions. In literature, these flows are mostly studied by means of injecting air into the spatially developing turbulent boundary layer (TBL) of a flat plate. In most of these studies a backward-facing step or cavitator is used upstream of the air injector (Zverkhovskyi 2014; Barbaca et al. 2019). While this insert is shown to enhance the stability of the air phase, it demands an additional hull modification on existing ships. Another option is to inject air into the TBL without the use of such inserts, a configuration much less researched (Elbing 

et al. 2008; Jang et al. 2014; Nikolaidou et al. 2024). With this configuration, three air phase regimes are commonly observed. For a constant freestream velocity ( 𝑈 ∞) and for small air flow rates ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 ), a bubbly regime (BR) is observed. In this regime, dispersed bubbles are present in the flow. By further increasing 

𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 , the bubbles coalesce to form air patches ( transitional air layer regime - TALR). Eventually by further increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 , the air patches also coalesce and an air layer is formed ( air layer regime - ALR). Elbing et al. (2008) performed large scale air lubrication experiments in a 13 𝑚 long flat plate, where the shear stress was measured over several locations downstream of a slot-type injector. They defined each regime based on the resultant drag reduction (DR). More specifically, the TALR and the ALR were demarcated by 20% and 80% drag reduction, respectively. This was based on a single 𝑈 ∞ measurement and a single shear stress measurement location. These measurements revealed a steep increase in drag reduction with 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 within the TALR (20% < 𝐷 𝑅 < 80%) followed by a gradual convergence towards nearly 100% drag reduction as 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 increased further within the ALR. In our previous study (Nikolaidou et al. 2024), using a similar air injector as Elbing et al. (2008), we also found all three regimes with a similar morphology, but no quantitative comparison with Elbing et al. (2008) was possible in the absence of drag force measurements. While Elbing et al. (2008) performed experiments in a large range of conditions spanning all three air phase regimes, their focus was not on the physical mechanisms of drag reduction. In the following sections, we discuss the drag reduction mechanisms associated with the BR, TALR, and ALR separately, based on insights from other existing literature. Many studies have targeted the 𝐵𝑅 and explored the drag reduction mechanisms follow-ing the successful results of microbubble drag reduction (McCormick & Bhattacharyya 1973). As a result, earlier studies have focused particularly on microbubbles (e.g. Ferrante & Elghobashi 2004; Elbing et al. 2008; Sanders et al. 2006). In contrast, the effects of larger, millimeter-sized bubbles have received comparatively less attention. Across these studies, drag reduction mechanisms are generally attributed to modifications of the momentum transfer in the near-wall region, such that the drag is reduced. A broad consensus highlights bubble deformability — captured by the Weber number — as the main parameter governing drag reduction (Verschoof et al. 2016; Lu et al. 2005; Kim & Moin 2010; Van Gils et al. 2013). Murai (2014) summarized the successful drag reduction regimes in a bubble diameter - flow speed plot. He suggested a classification of the mechanisms by looking into the bubble sizes in comparison to the coherent structures. He notes that drag reduction can be achieved either by small bubbles ( 𝜇𝑚 − 𝑚𝑚 ) in high speed flows ( > 1 m/s) or larger bubbles ( 𝑚𝑚 ) in low speed flows ( < 0.1 m/s). For velocities in between these two regimes, bubbles smaller than one centimeter are increasing the drag by perturbing the laminar state and triggering flow transition. Yet, results of an increase  

> 0X0-2

Journal of Fluid Mechanics 

in drag due to bubbles are relatively scarce in literature. Henry et al. (2023) performed air lubrication measurements on a flat plate over smooth and rough surfaces. A drag increase was reported for 𝑈 ∞ = 2 m/s and the lowest air flow rates tested within the BR. No information on the corresponding bubble size was reported. These drag increasing bubbles were measured to travel at approximately 0 .5𝑈 ∞ while the relative bubble speed increased with increasing 𝑈 ∞ suggesting that for higher 𝑈 ∞ bubbles might migrate at the outer layer of the TBL. Biswas & Govardhan (2024) performed experiments in shallow channel flow, with and without salts, at relatively low Reynolds numbers. They saw that smaller bubbles (as a result of salt addition) result in drag increase. They attributed this effect in smaller bubbles being less deformable due to their more spherical size and also due to the deposition of salt ions at the bubble water interface. They noticed that smaller bubbles stay densely packed and close to the top wall, unlike the smaller salt-born bubbles which disperse near the top wall. Bubble drag increase was also found by Gabillet et al. (2002). In that experiment, bubbles were injected from a porous layer in the bottom wall of a channel, rising to the top one. It is shown that close to the (bottom) wall, near the injection, bubbles are of the same size as the energy containing eddies and successfully modify near-wall turbulence, while the liquid flow profile behaves like a rough TBL with the roughness parameter correlating with bubble size. Hori (2024) performed interface-resolving DNS on a bubbly plane-Couette flow for low 𝑅𝑒 𝜏 numbers. The effect of bubbles and air layers on the drag force was investigated by varying the Weber and Froude numbers for moderate volume fractions of air (1% - 5%). They found that in small Weber and high Froude cases, bubbles increase drag with respect to the single-phase flow. By decomposing the stresses in contributions of advection, diffusion and interfacial tension, they found that in these drag-increasing cases, there is a large contribution from the interfacial tension term, which enhances momentum transfer. Within the TALR, larger air patches are formed (TALR). This regime is largely unexplored with only a few instances in literature (Jang et al. 2014; Nikolaidou et al. 

2024). No conclusive information on the drag reduction mechanisms is reported, but it is hypothesized that drag reduction comes directly from the reduction of wetted area. Regarding the ALR, the same hypothesis holds. At the same time, it is shown that this regime is sensitive to upstream disturbances from the incoming TBL (Elbing et al. 2013). Similarly, in Nikolaidou et al. (2024) it was found that the incoming TBL conditions affect both the onset of the ALR and also the air layer topology: bigger air layer thickness to incoming TBL thickness ratios result in an earlier onset of ALR and a larger air layer length. In addition, local, instantaneous incoming TBL organization also governs break up of the air layer close to the injector (Laskari 2025). Since the 𝐴𝐿𝑅 is the desired regime in terms of drag reduction, special attention has been given in literature to the critical air flow rate 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 , the one needed for an air layer to be formed. While it has been shown that 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 increases with 𝑈 ∞, only a few scaling attempts have been reported. In Elbing et al. (2013) a potential scaling of the 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 is proposed by analyzing a single bubble, subjected to shear flow. This scaling indicates that the transition to ALR depends on the ratio of buoyancy to turbulent shear forces, with buoyancy promoting phase separation and turbulent fluctuations enhancing phase dispersion. While a good collapse of most results was exhibited, the authors suggest it is not conclusive and should be regarded as a starting point for further work on the onset of ALR (Elbing et al. 2013). Scaling of the 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 is also discussed in Peifer et al. (2020), where the authors adopt the following approach: they assume that an air layer is formed and hypothesize that interfacial instabilities — such as Kelvin –Helmholtz waves and turbulent fluctuations — act to wet the surface. They therefore propose that the frequency of wetting events depends on both the outer liquid flow characteristics and the thickness of the air  

> 0X0-3

Nikolaidou et al. 

layer. Despite these efforts, there is still no scaling of the critical air flow rate that captures all phenomena and further tests are needed. While the aforementioned experiments span a wide range of conditions, a parameter not highlighted enough is the depth of the experimental facility and its potential effect on the air phase topology and dynamics. In the case of the ALR, a free surface is present between the air layer and the surrounding liquid. Using the liquid freestream velocity 𝑈 ∞ and the facility depth 𝑑 , a Froude-depth number, 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 , can be defined. Only a limited number of studies explicitly address the role of 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 . Barbaca et al. (2019) reported a change in cavity closure behavior and hypothesized that it was related to variations in 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 . In contrast, M¨ akiharju et al. (2013), who conducted measurements exclusively in the supercritical regime ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1.4), suggested that the cavity closure mechanism should remain similar at lower Froude numbers, since the dominant parameters ( 𝑈 ∞, fluid properties, and closure configuration) remain unaltered with 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 . In most studies, due to the limited depth of facilities, 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1 such that the flow is supercritical, analogous to the supercritical open channel flow regime (Elbing et al. 2008; Sanders et al. 2006; M¨ akiharju et al. 2013; Elbing 

et al. 2013). In these studies, although imaging of the air phase is not performed, it is stated that once the air layer is formed it covers the total length of the flat plate. Only few studies exists within the subcritical regime yielding 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 1 (Zverkhovskyi 2014; Nikolaidou 

et al. 2024). For this regime, it has been shown, using potential flow theory, that a stable cavity length exists and can be predicted by the dispersion relation (Matveev 2003; Butuzov 1966, 1967). More specifically, for deep water conditions (approximately 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 0.61), it has been shown that the air cavity length is in good agreement with half a gravity wave predicted by the dispersion relation (Qin et al. 2019; Nikolaidou et al. 2024). However, no systematic analysis of the influence of 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 has been conducted, and this constitutes one of the main objectives of the present work. In order to investigate the potential effect of 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 on the air phase topology, imaging data are required. Past experimental studies have typically focused on measuring drag forces (Elbing et al. 2008; Sanders et al. 2006), while imaging data are often limited to the BR (for bubble sizes) in few conditions, or targeted in the closure region (M¨ akiharju et al. 2013; Elbing et al. 2013) of the air layer. The global morphology of the air phase regime is rarely captured. On the other hand, imaging of the air phase topology by means of high speed imaging or x-ray densitometry (Barbaca et al. 2019; Gawandalkar et al. 2025; Qin et al. 

2019) have been used to gain insight to the air phase topology of similar flows. However no studies exists that combine both drag force measurements and imagining of the global air phase topology. In this paper, simultaneous measurements of the drag force acting on a flat plate TBL and imaging of the air phase regimes are performed. The latter allows us to probe the air phase topology and perform a quantitative analysis of the air phase characteristics. By combining it with drag measurements, we aim to gain physical insight into the mechanisms responsible for drag reduction. To that end, the air flow rate, freestream velocity and Froude-depth number are systematically varied, allowing a wide range of air phase regimes to be investigated and general trends to be identified. These are discussed and compared for different 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 conditions (subcritical and supercritical) to fill in the aforementioned knowledge gap in this context. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In §2 the experimental setup and methods are given. In §3 the single phase flow parameters of a developing TBL along a flat plate are given which are then used to evaluate the influence of air. Sections 4 and 5 both describe the multiphase flow results associated with 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1 and 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 1 respectively. In 

§6 all results are combined in a single air phase regime map and scaling considerations of the critical air flow rate are presented.   

> 0X0-4

Focus on Fluids articles must not exceed this page length Journal of Fluid Mechanics large degasser test section diff. pressure sensor small contraction honeycomb temp. sensor large contraction separation vessel de-aeration tower Inline Thruster housing  

> Figure 1. Sketch of the multiphase flow tunnel. Arrows indicate the liquid flow direction. For an indication of the scale: the test section is 2.1 m long. The sketch is adapted by the original one by P. Poot.

2. Experimental Setup & methods 

2.1. Facility 

The experiments were performed in the new multiphase flow tunnel (MPFT) at the Ship Hydromechanics laboratory of Delft University of Technology. The flow is driven by a Voith Inline Thruster (VIT; Voith, Heidenheim, Germany) resulting in low noise and vibrations. The operational range of the impeller leads to freestream velocities 𝑈 ∞ = 2.13 m/s to 13 m/s and with the addition of an orifice plate downstream of the rim-driven thruster, a minimum 𝑈 ∞ = 0.5 m/s can be reached. To facilitate air lubrication experiments, the MPFT features two kind of degassing mechanisms to prevent air circulation: a de-aeration tower and a large horizontal degasser (Figure 1). In the de-aeration tower, the air-water mixture impacts a sloped plate that breaks air patches, allowing air to escape via a separation vessel, while water flows downstream. The horizontal degasser features a specially designed top lid that collects rising bubbles and directs them to the separation vessel. The former degassing mechanism is mainly effective for lower velocities ( < 3 m/s) and the latter for higher ones. Before entering the test section the flow is conditioned with a honeycomb and two contractions (Figure 1) to ensure a uniform inflow and low turbulence intensity ( < 0.6% as measured by laser doppler anemometry (Nikolaidou et al. 2026)). The test section is 2.136 m long and the cross section varies from 0.3 × 0.3 𝑚 2 at the inlet to 0 .3 × 0.32 𝑚 2 at the outlet due to a sloping bottom. The sloping bottom was designed to compensate for the TBL growth for 2 m/s. The test section is tightly sealed with a lid, and it can be pressurized up to 2 bar overpressure. Transparent windows are present on the sides of the tunnel and the bottom, while the top has limited access with 4 viewing windows. The water level in the test section can be monitored with a transparent tube and is kept constant throughout the experiments. 2.2. Test plates 

Two different test plates were used during the experiments, one for single phase flow and one for air lubrication measurements. The former was a simple flat plate without inserts, used to measure the TBL flow for validation of our measurement system (see section 3). The air lubrication plate was more complex and was subsequently used for multiphase flow measurements (see sections 4 and 5). The test plates were positioned flush with the ceiling of the test section and were submerged in water (depth 𝑑 = 0.3 m). Both were made out of transparent polycarbonate, with length 𝐿 = 1.95 m and width 𝐵 = 0.295 m. The thickness 

0 X0-5 Nikolaidou et al. LED air box porous layer flow conditioner test plate air slot flow   

> (a) porous layer fl ow condi �oner air box 36 m mLED air air
> fl ow 4 mm slot 5 cm test plate (b) Figure 2. Sketch of the air injector. (a) 3D view from the top and (b) side view. Liquid flow is from right to left.

was 11 mm and 36 mm (in 3 layers of 12 mm) for the single phase and air lubrication plates, respectively. A zig-zag strip of 0.8 mm thickness was placed 10 cm upstream of the leading edge of the test plates in the tunnel contraction to ensure a turbulent boundary layer. In the case of the air lubrication plate, air was introduced vertically from the top layer through four manifolds equally spaced along the plate’s width (see Figure 2). It was then dispersed in an air box within the second layer, whose downstream end was fitted with a porous material and flow conditioner, ensuring homogeneous distribution. At the last layer, air was injected vertically into the liquid turbulent boundary layer (TBL) via a 𝑡 = 4 mm wide slot-type injector (same as in our previous work Nikolaidou et al. (2024)), spanning the width of the plate and located 140 mm downstream of its leading edge. The last layer of the plate was also fitted with side fences along its length (2 mm thick and 49 mm in height) to restrict air escaping from the sides (see Figure 3). Within the plate’s middle layer an in-house made LED panel was placed downstream of the injection slot (in a watertight housing) to illuminate the entire plate length and width downstream of the injector, as required for the imaging system (see section 2.4). The air injection was controlled via a mass flow controller (Bronkhorst EL-FLOW Select series) located several meters upstream of the injector location along with an air filter. The flow meter was factory calibrated for a nominal air flow range of 4 - 500 𝑙 𝑛 /min with an accuracy of ± 0.5 % error in the reading value and ± 0.1 % of the full range while the repeatability is 0.2% of the measured value. 2.3. Drag force measurement system 

Both test plates were fitted to a drag force measurement system during their respective uses. This custom-made force balance was designed and built to assess the total friction force of the lower surface of the test plate. The design was based on previously established ones (Zverkhovskyi 2014). A load cell (type BM6A by Zemic) with a maximum capacity of 6 kg (60 𝑁 ) was used. The cell was made from IP68 stainless steel and was suitable for underwater applications both in fresh and salt water. The test plate was suspended by four vertical rods, with their top end fixed to the tunnel side walls and their bottom attached to longitudinal bars supporting the plate over its length (see Figure 3). This allowed plate motion only in the flow direction with alignment screws enabling precise leveling (angle of attack ±1◦). The streamwise displacement of the plate was measured by the load cell, mounted 370 mm from its leading edge. The plate’s width and length were adjusted to maintain a 1.5 mm gap between the plate and the tunnel walls 

0 X0-6 Journal of Fluid Mechanics fi xed to the wall force sensor ver �cal rod test plate fences horizontal rod  

> Figure 3. Sketch of drag force measurement system attached to the air lubrication plate.

to allow movement and avoid interference. For the air lubrication plate, apart from the side fences, a plastic film at the trailing edge was also used to prevent air from escaping through that gap. The force balance had to be calibrated in situ. In operating conditions the test section was closed from the top (see Figure 1) and filled with water to the brim, resulting in the sensor being fully submerged in water. The calibration was performed without the lid, but with water on top of the plate and the sensor being underwater. Once the lid was closed, the experiments took place and in the end the calibration was repeated to ensure that nothing changed in the system in between. The calibration was performed using standard forces (weights) and a pulley arrangement in accordance to the guidelines given by the ITTC (2017). The calibration involved 16 steps in total of loading and unloading conditions raging from zero to 55 N with a preload as well. A linear relation was found between the output signal in volt and the force in Newton, with a small standard error ( 𝜎 = 6.9 × 10 −3

𝑉 , equivalent to 0.0018 𝑁 ). 2.4. Imaging system 

For the air lubrication measurements, two different imaging systems were used, to accommodate two different research objectives. First, we wanted to capture the three-dimensional air phase topology synchronously with the measured drag force, in order to gain insights into the different drag reduction mechanisms. This necessitated multiple plane views ( 𝑥 − 𝑦 , 𝑥 − 𝑧 ; see Figure 4a for the coordinate system used), high resolution and thus smaller fields of view (FOVs). Second, we wanted to associate the measured drag force with the total air covered plate area, and probe their correlation. This required large FOVs on the 𝑥 − 𝑧 plane (see Figure 4b). Three Imager Pro X 4M cameras (10-bit, LaVision) with a pixel size of 7.4 𝜇𝑚 and a resolution of 2048 × 2048 pixels were used for both setups in different configurations and with different lenses, as described below. For wall-parallel imaging planes, illumination was provided by the aforementioned LED panel built within the test plate, while wall-normal imaging was back-lit by another LED panel resting on the tunnel side wall (see Figures 2 and 4a, respectively). Davis 10.2 (LaVision GmbH) was used for data acquisition. For the first setup, camera 1 was positioned in a down-up configuration imaging the 

𝑥 − 𝑧 plane downstream of the injection slot. This camera provided information on the global air phase characteristics. Camera 2 captured a smaller FOV of the same plane with an increased spatial resolution. Images from this camera were used for estimating smaller features (e.g. bubble sizes). Lastly, a third camera (3) capturing the 𝑥 − 𝑦 plane was used 

0 X0-7 Nikolaidou et al. fl ow air injec �on side FOV LED camera 1 camera 2 camera 3 

> x
> yz

(a) Camera setup 1. camera 1 air injection scamera 3 camera 2 flow sxyz (b) Camera setup 2. 

Figure 4. Imaging systems used for the multiphase flow campaign. camera No. FOV (mm × mm) focal length (mm) 𝑓 # resolution (px/mm) 1 740 ×740 24 5.6 2.75 2 110 ×110 105 5.6 18.48 3 70 ×70 105 5.6 30.16 

Table 1. Camera setup 1 details. camera No. FOV (mm × mm) focal length (mm) 𝑓 # resolution (px/mm) 1 510 ×510 35 4 42 490 ×490 35 4 4.22 3 780 ×780 24 4 2.61 

Table 2. Camera setup 2 details. 

to estimate the bubbly/air layer thickness. This camera was placed in the middle of the test section, except for some tests where it was traversed close to the air injector. All three cameras were synchronously capturing independent snapshots with an acquisition frequency of 0.8 to 7.4 Hz depending on the 𝑈 ∞. For this campaign 𝑈 ∞ varied from 0.5 to 5.5 m/s, while 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 from 5 to 400 l/min. Details of this camera setup are given in Table 1. For the second setup, the same three Imager Pro X 4M cameras were used, but in a different configuration. They were positioned below the test section in a down-up configuration to collectively capture the total 𝑥 − 𝑧 extent of the test plate downstream of the injection slot. A small overlap between the three field-of-views (FOVs) was present to allow stitching. The acquisition frequency varied from 1.11 to 1.94 Hz depending on 𝑈 ∞,to ensure statistically independent snapshots, whose total number varied from 1000-1500. In this campaign 𝑈 ∞ was 2 m/s and 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 varied from 5 - 140 l/min. The exposure time was set to 200 𝜇𝑠 to achieve less than one pixel motion blur. Details of this camera setup are given in Table 2. 2.5. Experimental program & procedure 

Two experimental campaigns were performed. First, single phase flow measurements of the drag force acting on the flat plate were performed for a freestream velocity range of 2 to 

0 X0-8 Journal of Fluid Mechanics                                                               

> Parameters Definition Value Units
> Freestream velocity 𝑈 ∞0.5−7m/s Air flow rate 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 5−450 l/min Reynolds number 𝑅𝑒 𝐿 =𝑈 ∞𝐿 /𝜈 1−14 ×10 6-Froude-depth number 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 =𝑈 ∞/√︁ 𝑔𝑑 0.29 −4-non-dimensional air flux 𝐶 𝑄 =𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 /𝐵𝑡𝑈 ∞0.012 −1.4-
> Table 3. Experimental parameters of the multiphase flow campaign using camera setup 1. x (m) 𝑅𝑒 𝑥 ×10 6𝛿 99 (mm) 𝑈 ∞(m/s) 𝜈 /𝑢 𝜏 (𝜇 m) 0.1 2.4 16 5.08 4.38 0.975 7.6 51 5.06 4.77 1.85 12.8 77 4.98 5.19
> Table 4. Experimental parameters of the single phase flow campaign.

7 m/s. These included drag force measurements of the flat plate without imaging. Secondly, single and multiphase flow measurements of the drag force acting on the air lubrication plate were performed with synchronous imaging of the air phase. For this campaign the two imaging systems described above were used. First, a short campaign was performed using camera setup 2. Secondly, measurements using camera setup 1 were performed. A summary of the experimental conditions for the latter is given in Table 3. For a given rotational frequency of the VIT, the mean drag force was recorded at 100 Hz and averaged over 10 minutes, which was sufficient for convergence. Simultaneously, the differential pressure across the contraction and the water temperature (as shown in Figure 1) were recorded and averaged. The differential pressure was used to estimate 𝑈 ∞,with a correction applied, as set by earlier LDA measurements (Nikolaidou et al. 2026). The signals were continuously recorded via LabVIEW. For the multiphase cases, measurements were first performed without air followed by those with air, the mass flow rate of which was also recorded and averaged. 

3. Single phase flow 

In this section, single phase flow results are presented in the absence of air injection. Firstly, the characteristics of the single phase TBL developing along the flat plate are given. Secondly, the drag force measurement system is validated against theoretical predictions. These will set the baseline for the multiphase flow measurements introduced later. 3.1. Flat plate TBL characterization 

The flat plate TBL thickness was measured with LDA (Nikolaidou et al. 2026) in three streamwise locations along the plate and multiple velocities (see Table 4 for one 𝑈 ∞). Due to the sloping bottom of the test section, the freestream velocity was found to slightly decrease at the most downstream position ( ≈ 2%). Due to the position of the flat plate at the tunnel’s ceiling, the TBL was found to originate approximately 30 cm prior to the plate’s leading edge and with a growth was not strictly canonical. 

0 X0-9 Nikolaidou et al.  

> Figure 5. Flat plate total skin friction coefficient of the current measurements along with friction lines from literature (ITTC 1957; Schlichting 1979; Katsui 2005; Grigson 1999). Black markers are from measurements with a flat plate. Different marker shapes are from different measurement days. Grey markers are from measurements with the air lubrication plate. Error bars represent the bias and precision errors following ITTC (2002).

3.2. Drag force measurement validation 

In order to validate the drag force measurement system, measurements of the drag force acting on both the flat plate and the air lubrication plate were performed over a large range of freestream velocities. The total drag force coefficient was calculated as: 

𝐶 𝐷 = 2𝐷 𝑛𝑜𝑎𝑖𝑟 

𝜌𝑈 2 

> ∞

𝐴 (3.1) where 𝜌 is the calculated water density based on the measured temperature, 𝐷 𝑛𝑜𝑎𝑖𝑟 is the measured drag force acting on the flat plate, 𝑈 ∞ is the freestream velocity and 𝐴 is the test plate (bottom) surface area. The flat plate measurements of 𝐶 𝐷 are compared with reference friction lines from literature (Figure 5). More specifically, ITTC’s (ITTC 1957) and Prandtl-Schlichting’s (Schlichting 1979) semi-empirical formulas are plotted. Following Bose et al. (2005), Grigson’s (Grigson 1999) and Katsui’s (Katsui 2005) lines are also obtained through numerical integration of the local friction coefficient in the boundary layer. The Reynolds number is defined as 𝑅𝑒 𝐿 = 𝑈 ∞ 𝐿 /𝜈 . Use of the aforementioned TBL origin did not significantly alter the results presented here and as such this correction was not applied. The trend is consistent, and the results show good overall agreement. The experiments appear to be biased towards higher values compared to all the theoretical friction lines. Tests performed without a lid over the test section, revealed systematically lower values of the drag coefficient (approximately 5-6%) hinting to possible added resistance from water motion above the plate (supported also by visual observations). Since we are interested in changes in drag however, further investigation of such effects was considered out of 

0 X0-10 Rapids articles must not exceed this page length Journal of Fluid Mechanics 

the scope of the present study. Negligible differences were also found between the drag coefficients of the two test plates (with area differences due to the fences and sealing strip fitted on the air lubrication plate taken into account); thus, any potential form drag effects due to the different geometry of the air lubrication plate were marginal. An uncertainty analysis of 𝐶 𝐷 was performed following the recommendations by ITTC (2002). For both test plates, the largest source of uncertainty is the bias error from the calibration curve fit, due to the sensor’s large force range. A small precision error is found, as seen in the repeatability of flat plate measurements performed on different days, shown with different (black) markers in Figure 5. The air lubrication plate has slightly higher uncertainty due to additional bias from the manufacturer error (material tolerances), caused by the system’s complexity. Following the aforementioned baseline checks in absence of air (injection), results of multiphase flow conditions are discussed next. 

> 4. Air injection - supercritical conditions

In this section, multiphase flow results pertaining to supercritical flow conditions are discussed, i.e. all cases 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1. In section 5 subcritical flow results are presented separately. This classification will be more clear once both conditions are presented and discussed. 4.1. Baseline drag reduction and air regime topology 

We here first introduce the general air phase regime topology, along with the corresponding drag forces. A typical drag reduction curve obtained during the experiments can be seen in Figure 6. In what follows, drag reduction is calculated with: 

𝐷 𝑅 = 𝑐 × 𝐷 𝑛𝑜𝑎𝑖𝑟 − 𝐷 𝑎𝑖𝑟 

𝐷 𝑛𝑜𝑎𝑖𝑟 

(4.1) where 𝐷 𝑛𝑜𝑎𝑖𝑟 in the drag force of the air lubrication plate without air ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 0), 𝐷 𝑎𝑖𝑟 

is the drag force of the test plate with air ( 𝑄 = 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 ) and 𝑐 is a constant. The constant 

𝑐 is introduced because 𝐷 𝑎𝑖𝑟 is the force experienced by the test plate in its entirety (see Figure 3). In reality, only a part of the test plate can be lubricated (downstream of the injector and up to a height equal to the air layer thickness on the side fences). Using the measured maximum air thickness (see section 4.2.2) and assuming a linear increase in 𝐷 𝑅 

with the covered test plate area, we obtain 𝑐 = 1.34 − 1.35. Although introducing 𝑐 adds an additional bias error to 𝐷 𝑎𝑖𝑟 , this correction is applied since we are interested in drag reduction over the area that can be covered by air: downstream of the air injector and along a part of the side fences area. This also enables us to compare our results with other studies where typically local shear sensors are used to estimate drag reduction. These sensors only consider the local effect of air by definition (Elbing et al. 2008; M¨ akiharju et al. 2013). For small air flow rates, a bubbly regime is observed (Figure 6), where dispersed bubbles are present in the flow (Figure 7a). In our configuration, bubbles are not formed due to the injector geometry (e.g. orifices plate or porous layer as used in Sanders et al. (2006) and Madavan et al. (1985)), but they are formed at the injection slot due to the impact of the air flow with the incoming TBL, which causes the air to break into bubbles. A similar mechanism was presented by Shen et al. (2006) and Park et al. (2015). Interestingly enough, from Q = 0 to Q = 20 l/min a drag increase (𝐷 𝑅 < 0) is measured, which peaks at Q =  

> 0X0-11

Nikolaidou et al.                    

> Figure 6. Drag reduction with increasing air flow rate for a nominal freestream velocity of 2 m/s ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 =1.24). The vertical dashed line demarcates the transition to the air layer regime at 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 . Right insert: side view ( 𝑥 −𝑦 plane) of the air layer at 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =140 l/min. Left insert: side view ( 𝑥 −𝑦 plane) of the bubbly regime at 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =30 l/min.

10 l/min. Drag increase cases are rarely reported in literature. The drag increase changes to a decrease by further increasing Q. This drag behavior within the bubbly regime will be addressed in detail at section 4.2.1. By further increasing the air flow rate, the bubbles coalesce and air patches are present in the flow (Figure 7b), as also reported in Nikolaidou et al. (2024) and Elbing et al. (2008). While drag is further decreased in this transitional regime, it happens gradually, unlike the steep change for 𝐷 𝑅 > 20%, previously reported by Elbing et al. (2008) for a similar configuration. It is therefore hard to demarcate the bubbly and transitional regimes through the corresponding drag reduction curve. Nikolaidou et al. (2024) found a steep increase in non-wetted area in this region. The availability of synchronous force measurements and imaging data in the current experiments enables the comparison of the two. This will be further elaborated in section 4.1.2. For 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 , the individual air patches coalesce and an air layer (Figure 7c) of a certain thickness is formed (see right side insert in 6). This jump in morphology is not gradual but sharp (here observed within the 5 l/min resolution of the air flow). It is correlated with ≈ 60% drag reduction and a clear change in the slope of the 𝐷 𝑅 − 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 

curve. On average, the air layer de-wets the top wall across the total length of the test section except for the region close to the air injector, where wetted patches persist. The air layer extends beyond the field-of-view of Figure 7c, and the closure can thus not be observed in this image. The integrity of the air layer is disturbed by various factors observed during the experiments. This will be further elaborated in section 4.2.2. Due to the supercriticality of the flow, the air layer is unbounded (Matveev 2003), meaning that the closure of this air layer extents outside of the test section length (until somewhere in the diffusor). In that sense the morphology of the air layer is different from air cavity cases formed behind 

0 X0-12 Journal of Fluid Mechanics air injector        

> (a) bubble regime air injector
> (b) transitional regime air injector
> (c) air layer regime
> Figure 7. Characteristics images of the multiphase flow topology: (a) bubbly, (b) transitional, and (c) air layer regime, for 𝑈 ∞=2 m/s. Air flow rate increases from top to bottom. Black rectangle indicates the injector slot location, while the white region could not be imaged.

a backward facing step or a cavitator (Zverkhovskyi 2014) or in the case of subcritical conditions ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 1) (Nikolaidou et al. 2024). The latter will be further explored in section 5. 4.1.1. Hysteresis effects & repeatability 

For all the experiments performed, the air flow rate was increased from 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 0 to 

𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝑄 𝑚𝑎𝑥 and all three regimes (bubbly, transitional and an air layer) were observed. In order to investigate any hysteresis effects the opposite sequence was also tested: starting from the highest air flow rate where an air layer regime was present, drag was measured as air flow rate was decreased to zero. Both scenarios can be seen in Figure 8. The error bars depict the experimental uncertainty due to the bias error. Repeated measurements for each scenario are shown separately. In the bubbly regime ( 𝑄 < 60 l/min), differences fall within experimental uncertainty. In the transitional regime (and especially between 100 l/min to 120 l/min), larger differences arise, exceeding uncertainty, but repeated measurements also show high variability. This suggests that the nature of the transitional regime itself drives 𝐷 𝑅 variations rather than hysteresis effects. The importance of repeated measurements is highlighted here. Conversely, the air layer regime onset is consistent for all measurements, with drag reduction within experimental uncertainty. 

0 X0-13 Nikolaidou et al.       

> Figure 8. Drag reduction measurements in the case of increasing air flow rate from (bubbly to air layer regime) and decreasing air flow rate (air layer to bubbly regime) for 𝑈 ∞=3 m/s ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 =1.75). Repeat measurements are also shown (without error bars).

Based on the above, we have demonstrated that there is no difference between the air flux required for creation and maintenance of the air layer, which is the desired regime for drag reduction. That means that the supplied air flow rate should always be at least equal to the critical one ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 ), to be able to maintain the air layer. Lowering the air flow rate would mean that the air layer would break and drag would be increased. That is one of the main disadvantages of this air injection strategy compared to partial cavities reported by (among others) Zverkhovskyi (2014), Makiharju et al. (2010), Arndt et al. (2009), and Gawandalkar et al. (2025), who measured a difference in formation and maintenance air flow rates. 4.1.2. Non-wetted area and drag reduction correlation 

Next, for the same drag reduction results that have been presented in Figure 6, the 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 

non-wetted area coverage 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 downstream of the air injector is calculated (see Table 2 and section 2 for details on the experimental setup). To the best of the authors knowledge, this correlation has not been explored in this context before, only qualitative discussions have linked the percentage of non-wetted area with drag reduction. For each 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 ranging from 5 l/min to 100 l/min, bubbly/ air layer coverage was quantified by bubble segmentation using Artificial Intelligence (AI). More specifically, a zero-shot Segment Anything Model (SAM) was implemented as an extension of the flow segmentation framework and modified for bubbly flow images (Khojasteh et al. 2024). Although SAM can be fine-tuned for bubbly flows (Khojasteh et al. 2024) and related two phase flow studies have reported retraining the model for complex interfaces (K¨ uc ¸ ¨ uk et al. 

2025), the zero-shot configuration in the present work provided sufficient performance to proceed. For each image, the automatic mask generator sampled a uniform grid of point prompts to generate candidate bubble masks; candidates were filtered using the model predicted Intersection over Union (IoU) stability score criterion, and box based non maximum suppression, with optional small region cleanup via min mask region area (Kirillov et al. 2023). To isolate dispersed bubbles and ignore the large connected patches that appear at higher air flow rates ( ≥ 70 l/min), masks were post processed by projected pixel area 𝐴 and only masks within a prescribed range were used. For higher air flow 

0 X0-14 Journal of Fluid Mechanics           

> Figure 9. Non-wetted area, calculated from down-up images versus drag reduction measurements for 𝑈 ∞=2m/s ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 =1.24). Air flow rate increases from left (5 l/min) to right (100 l/min). See Figure 6 for the air flow rates specification. Dashed line indicates 𝐷 𝑅 =𝐴 𝑛𝑤 for reference.

rates ( > 80 l/min), where bubble patches became large and image contrast decreased, the automatic segmentation was refined manually using an interactive add/remove step with the SAM predictor: spurious regions were removed by selecting masks, and missing/partial bubbles were added using point prompts and, when needed, bounding box prompts to trim oversized predictions prior to analysis (Kirillov et al. 2023). Following the calculation of 

𝐴 𝑛𝑤 of all the images, an average value is calculated. Results show that the non-wetted area coverage is not equal to the resultant drag reduction in any of the three air phase regimes. On the contrary, the 𝐷 𝑅 lags behind the 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 . Overall, the 𝐷 𝑅 − 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 trend is similar with the 𝐷 𝑅 − 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 one (see Figure 9 and Figure 6) for the BR and TALR, while a different trend is seen for the ALR. Although a correlation can be seen between 𝐷 𝑅 and 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 in each regime separately, no universal correlation exists. Starting with the BR, it can be seen that for low 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 , increasing 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 (via increasing 

𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 ) results in a drag increase . That persists up to a 35% coverage of the flat plate. Further increasing 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 up to 53% results in a low drag reduction of around 7%. It must be noted that the non-wetted area within the bubbly regime does not correspond to the amount of air de-wetting the top wall: it is just the projection of the bubbles to the top wall which may or may not be touching the wall. By further increasing 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 within TALR, 𝐷 𝑅 increases at a higher rate. As a result, the lag between the parameters is reduced, and a better correlation is seen. In this regime, bubbles/ air patches are “flatter” and most likely the calculated 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 is closer to the actual amount of air de-wetting the wall. However, the lag remains considerable: a 75% non-wetted area corresponds to merely 32% 𝐷 𝑅 . Comparing the last two points within the TALR, a big increase in 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 is calculated (17%). However, this increase is not proportionally translated to a 𝐷 𝑅 increase (6%). A clear jump in 𝐷 𝑅 is observed when further increasing 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 , which coincides with the onset of ALR ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 ): a moderate increase in 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 (4.5%) results in a large DR increase (22%) owing to the TALR air patches coalescing into an air layer. At this point, the 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 is already 92% with only a few wetted patches close to the air injector (see Figure 18, discussed in detail later). Interestingly, an even steeper increase of 𝐷 𝑅 to 69% is 

0 X0-15 Nikolaidou et al.   

> Figure 10. Drag reduction curves, for different 𝑈 ∞. The dashed lines demarcate the regime transitions.

observed when 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 reaches 97%. Finally, a maximum DR of 77% (marked by × in Figure 9) is measured for an almost 100% air coverage. Within the ALR, for a further increase of 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 above 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 , the wetted patches near the wall never cease to exist but the air layer gets thicker, which could possibly contribute to the DR increase (Figure 17b). In the next section, the reasons for this DR increase within 𝐴𝐿𝑅 will be discussed. From the above, it can be concluded that the non-wetted area coverage alone is not enough to characterize the drag reduction regimes or provide clear insights regarding the governing mechanisms. As a result, drag force measurements and multi-plane images of the air phase are needed for each condition. 4.2. Effect of freestream velocity on drag reduction curves 

The effect of 𝑈 ∞ on drag reduction is systematically examined across the different air phase regimes. Figure 10 presents drag reduction as defined in equation 4.1, plotted against air flow rate 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 for varying 𝑈 ∞. For clarity, repeated measurements are omitted, although good repeatability is achieved (see appendix A). Across all 𝑈 ∞, the general trend is consistent: a bubbly, a transitional, and an air layer regime emerge for increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 with similar morphological features. In the current experiments, the effect of 𝑈 ∞ is different for low ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 < 40 l/min) and higher air flow rates: for the former, increasing 𝑈 ∞ results in a monotonic increase of the drag reduction (when keeping 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 constant), while the opposite is true for higher air flow rates ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 > 40 l/min). This enables a distinction between the bubbly and transitional regimes, which is not possible when analyzing a single 𝑈 ∞ curve. Further investigation of the physical meaning of this “pivot point” (here at 𝐷 𝑅 = 8%), potentially via non-dimensionalizing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 in Figure 10 could provide a more formal distinction between the regimes. The transition from TALR to ALR on the other hand is defined as the first occurrence of 𝐷 𝑅 = 60%, coinciding with a clear reduction in the 𝐷 𝑅 − 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 slope and 

0 X0-16 Journal of Fluid Mechanics 10_1 40_1 40_1 20_60 20_55 10_1 

(a) 10_1 40_1 40_1 20_60 20_55 10_1 

(b) (a) (b) 

(c) Figure 11. Instantaneous images of the bubbly regime in the 𝑥 − 𝑧 plane for (a) 𝑈 ∞ = 5 m/s and (b) 𝑈 ∞ = 2m/s. 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 increases from left to right (10 l/min, 20 l/min and 40 l/min). (c) The corresponding drag reduction curves. The black vertical arrow indicates that drag reduction increases with 𝑈 ∞ for low air injection rates. Flow is from right to left. 

supported by flow visualization (for all 𝑈 ∞). In Elbing et al. (2008), a 𝐷 𝑅 20% and a 80% classification was made for the bubbly-transitional and transitional-air layer regime limits. However, these limits and the drag reduction levels in general are not directly comparable to those of present study due to differences in the measurement techniques—specifically, the use of a local versus a global drag measurement. Better drag reduction agreement is expected in the bubbly and transitional regimes, where the air distribution is more homogeneous over the width and length of the domain. In contrast, in the air layer regime, strong spatial non-uniformity - e.g. wetted patches near the injector and an intact layer downstream - likely lead to lower global DR estimates. For all 𝑈 ∞, after transitioning to ALR, further increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 has only a small effect on DR. For example, for 𝑈 ∞ = 5 m/s at 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 , 𝐷 𝑅 is 63%. To achieve a 11% increase in 𝐷 𝑅 , the air flow rate should be increased by 43%. This is especially relevant for real ship applications, where a cost-benefit analysis is used to determine the working conditions of the air lubrication system. The intermediate region (40 < 𝑄 < 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 ) is characterized by drag reduction lines of various slopes. For increasing 𝑈 ∞, the slope of the curves becomes lower. That means that for higher 𝑈 ∞, relatively more injected air is needed for an increase in 𝐷 𝑅 .To further explore these different effects of increasing 𝑈 ∞ across the three regimes, in the next sections the air phase characteristics are quantified using the available imaging data and the results are discussed in tandem with the corresponding drag reduction behavior. 4.2.1. Characteristics of the bubbly regime 

In this section, we will focus on the early stages of the bubbly regime ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 < 40 l/min in Figure 10). For these low air flow rates, the multiphase flow exhibits a different behavior than in the rest of the regimes: for constant 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 , increasing 𝑈 ∞ leads to a decrease in drag, while for all other air flow rates the opposite is true. This points to a potentially different drag reduction (or augmentation) mechanism than that of the transitional and air layer regimes. 

0 X0-17 Nikolaidou et al. original segmented original segmented                     

> original segmented
> (a)
> (b) (c) Figure 12. Bubble size statistics. (a) original and segmented images for 𝑈 ∞=2 m/s (left) and 𝑈 ∞=3.5 m/s (right). (b) Probability distribution of the bubble diameter ( 𝑑 𝑏 ) for air flow rates ranging from 𝑄 air =5 to 40 l/min and 𝑈 ∞=2 m/s. Vertical dashed line indicates the thickness of the bubbly layer 𝑦 𝑏 . (c) Bubble size range for three 𝑈 ∞and various air flow rates. The error bars represent the 2.5th and 97.5th percentile at the lower and upper end respectively. The area-weighted mean bubble size is indicated by “x”, while the median is denoted by “o”.

To explore this, we zoom in the region of 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 < 40 l/min in the DR profiles and assess it together with corresponding instantaneous bubbly images in the 𝑥 − 𝑦 and 𝑥 − 𝑧 planes (Figure 11). For the highest liquid velocity ( 𝑈 ∞ = 5 m/s), increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 has a negligible effect on bubble size (Figure 11a), while a monotonic increase of drag reduction is measured (Figure 11c). The most notable effect is an apparent increase in the number of bubbles, with a higher concentration along two streaks at the centerline of the plate. Such inhomogeneities can be often traced back to upstream disturbances and small geometry variations yet none could be identified definitively in our facility. For the lowest velocity ( 𝑈 ∞ = 2 m /s), increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 results in qualitatively larger bubbles (Figure 11b) but the corresponding 

𝐷 𝑅 here does not increase monotonically: it initially decreases from zero to negative values (denoting a drag increase) and reaches a local minimum, before increasing again (Figure 11c). A similar (albeit slightly lower) drag increase was also observed for 𝑈 ∞ = 2.5 m /s. Further tests with lower 𝑈 ∞, revealed that the local minimum in 𝐷 𝑅 increases in magnitude with decreasing freestream velocity (all the way down to approximately 1.2 m/s, see chapter 5 for more details). Earlier studies on the topic have associated the drag reducing abilities of bubbles to both their size and deformability (Verschoof et al. 2016), as well as the general topology (closely packed vs dispersed, Biswas & Govardhan (2024)). In this study we intentionally focused on acquiring synchronous imaging of both the wall-projected bubble area (Figure 11) and of the vertical bubble organization (Figure 13) which we will leverage in what follows in order to try and interpret these drag changes. In order to identify any other links between bubble topology and 𝐷 𝑅 , we first quantify the bubble sizes from our imaging data. Towards this end, we detect the bubble boundaries in the 𝑥 − 𝑧 plane using the AI-based image segmentation introduced in section 4.1.2. 

0 X0-18 Journal of Fluid Mechanics 

An example of the bubble detection can be seen in Figure 12a. For every 𝑈 ∞ − 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 

pair, 600 images are processed (corresponding to 150-300 bubbles per image for the lowest velocity and more than 1000 for the highest one). The equivalent bubble diameter 𝑑 𝑏 is then calculated from the 2D bubble area as 𝑑 𝑏 = 2√︁ 𝐴 𝑏 /𝜋 . In Figure 12b, the probability density function of all bubble diameters is shown for 𝑈 ∞ = 2 m/s. The bubbles range in size from a few mm to a maximum of 2 cm, with a wider 𝑑 𝑏 distribution and larger values for increasing 

𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 ; for all cases the distribution exhibits a lognormal behavior, as has been observed for bubbles and droplets in turbulence in a large range of configurations due to the underlying physics of coalescence and breakup (see Mouza et al. 2005; Jacob et al. 2010, among many others). For this 𝑈 ∞, the mode is mostly insensitive to 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 (≈ 3−4 mm) and approximately equal to the injector slot width ( 𝑡 = 4 mm). For higher 𝑈 ∞ (Figure 12c), the range and mean values of 𝑑 𝑏 both decrease, indicating that bubble sizes become more uniform and thus their distributions narrower (see also Figure 25 in Appendix B); yet, this velocity effect becomes less noticeable for 𝑈 ∞ > 3.5 m/s. Finally, from a quantification perspective, it should also be noted that, for 𝑈 ∞ = 5 m/s (for which the single phase 𝑢 𝜏 was accurately estimated, see table 4), the extracted 𝑑 𝑏 range (1 .86 − 2.19 mm) agrees remarkably well with the maximum bubble diameter predicted by the Kolmogorov-Hinze theory, as adapted for bubbles within the high shear region of wall-bounded flows by Sanders et al. (2006): 

𝑑 𝑚𝑎𝑥 = (𝜎 /2𝜌 )3/5 (𝜅𝑦 /𝑢 3 

> 𝜏

)2/5. Here, 𝑦 = 𝑦 𝑏 is the outermost bubble wall-normal location (defined in the next paragraphs) and results in a 𝑑 𝑚𝑎𝑥 between 1 .9 − 2.2 mm. Connecting these quantitative results for 𝑑 𝑏 with our drag results discussed above and with earlier studies is far from straightforward. Increasing the freestream velocity (for a constant 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 ) results in decreasing bubble size (Figure 11a & 11b, 12c) and also drag reduction (vertical line in Figure 11c). This suggests that drag reduction increases with decreasing 𝑑 𝑏 . This is in line with flat plate results from Henry et al. (2023), who observed a drag increase in bubbly regimes for the lowest velocity they tested ( 𝑈 ∞ = 2m /s), a trend that was reversed in higher velocities. Yet, the opposite effect was reported by Biswas & Govardhan (2024) in a lower Reynolds number experiment, where smaller bubbles were shown to increase drag. This was attributed to smaller bubble deformability, a notion introduced and supported by various other earlier studies (Lu et al. 2005; Verschoof et al. 

2016; Van Gils et al. 2013). Following the friction velocity Weber number definition by Lu 

et al. (2005), here we find 0 .5 < 𝑊 𝑒 < 15, where 𝑊 𝑒 = 𝜌𝑢 2 

> 𝜏

𝑑 𝑏 /𝜎 . This indicates that for all our cases, bubbles can be considered deformable. Those present at the lowest velocities are the most deformable ( 𝑊 𝑒 = 15) and yet they lead to the highest measured drag, indicating that deformability notions are not sufficient here to predict drag performance. For bubbles of size similar to ours (larger than coherent structures, but smaller than the TBL thickness, 10 × 𝑙 + < 𝑑 𝑏 < 𝛿 ), a different drag reduction mechanism was proposed by Murai (2014): bubble motion. Due to the various forces acting on the bubbles in such regimes, bubbles move in a cyclic manner similar to ejections and sweeps (Murai et al. 2006), effectively reducing shear stress. While in our study we did not measure bubble motion, as mentioned before, only our 𝐷 𝑅 results for 𝑈 ∞ ≥ 3m /s (drag decrease) are in line with the regime map from Murai (2014); for lower velocities we measure drag increase instead. What becomes clear from the above is that information from 𝑥 − 𝑧 planes (either in terms of total non-wetted area as was shown in section 4.1.2, or in terms of 𝑑 𝑏 and deformability as was shown here), even when it is quantitative, is not sufficient to explain the drag reduction effect of the bubbles. However, aside from wall-parallel bubble imaging, we also have synchronous imaging in a wall-normal plane ( 𝑥 −𝑦 ), which allows us to additionally analyze the vertical organization of the air phase and further probe its connection to drag characteristics. This is something  

> 0X0-19

Nikolaidou et al. U∞ increases drag decreases DR<0 DR>0      

> Figure 13. Side view images of the bubbly regime ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =10 l/min). 𝑈 ∞increases from top to bottom from 2 to 5 m/s. The drag decreases from top to bottom respectively.

that, to the best of our knowledge, has not been explored before in the current context. Figure 13 showcases side view snapshots from this vertical plane for 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 10 l/min and increasing 𝑈 ∞ (from top to bottom). In the case of the two lower velocities, bubbles are present in a single layer below the wall, and are severely flattened due to shear/buoyancy, while for 𝑈 ∞ ≥ 3m /s, smaller, more spherical bubbles are dispersed over multiple wall-normal locations. It is also readily observable that, while the individual bubble size 𝑑 𝑏 

decreases for increasing 𝑈 ∞ (Figure 12c), the overall bubbly layer thickness, 𝑦 𝑏 increases. More specifically, for the lowest velocity, 𝑦 𝑏 ≈ 6mm, showing a small increase as we increase 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 . For 𝑈 ∞ = 3.5m /s, 𝑦 𝑏 ≈ 6.5mm, again showing a slight increase with 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 .Lastly, for 𝑈 ∞ = 5m /s, a clear increase in the bubbly thickness is measured: 9 ≤ 𝑦 𝑏 ≤

13mm. It must be noted that in the case of the lowest 𝑈 ∞, 𝑦 𝑏 is representative of the height of a single bubble, but for higher ones where dispersion is at play, 𝑦 𝑏 corresponds to multiple bubbles. In all cases, 𝑦 + 

> 𝑏

is much larger than 300 and up to 0 .25 𝛿 indicating that bubbles reach the outer layer of the TBL. For both single and multi-bubble layers, it is also interesting to note the clear shear induced slope (see dashed red lines in Figure 13 

– flow is from right to left), reflecting the well-established downstream angle of coherent structures in wall-bounded turbulence. Returning to the topological disparity of the bubble layer for different 𝑈 ∞, it allows us to draw a more straightforward connection with the measured drag. Large bubbles present for 𝑈 ∞ < 3 m/s, sliding over the flat plate in single-bubble layers increase the drag. A 

0 X0-20 Journal of Fluid Mechanics 

possible mechanism could be that this single bubble layer acts similar to roughness and thus initially increase drag. It can be assumed that, as 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 increases further, the increase in non-wetted area eventually becomes sufficient for drag reduction, especially when a transitional regime of large air patches is reached. The latter happens for a much lower 

𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 compared to higher freestream velocities (see also Nikolaidou et al. (2024)), and this is why DR for 𝑈 ∞ < 3 m/s catches up ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 40 l/min, Figure 11c) and eventually outperforms the one for 𝑈 ∞ > 3 m/s ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 > 40 l/min, Figure 10 and see also next section). On the other hand, for 𝑈 ∞ > 3 m/s, much smaller bubbles are present in the TBL and they are vertically stacked, creating a multi-bubble layer, whose thickness increases with 

𝑈 ∞. Their drag reduction performance is initially far superior to the single bubble layer, providing drag decrease for even the smallest 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 tested here. As 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 increases further, although the DR keeps increasing, it is at a much slower pace than for lower 𝑈 ∞ (see Figure 10), reflecting the much higher needs for 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 to reach the transitional and air layer regimes (see sections 4.2.2 and 6). From an application perspective, it must be noted that the single layer bubble, present at low 𝑈 ∞, will not be relevant for full-scale ship applications, since ship service speeds far exceed 3m /s, so smaller bubbles dispersed in the vertical would be expected in most conditions. 4.2.2. Characteristics of the transitional and air layer regime 

Following the discussion for the bubbly regime in the previous section ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 < 40 l/min and 

𝐷 𝑅 < 8%), we now focus on higher air flow rates. As 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 increases, a transitional regime is reached first, in which bubbles have coalesced to larger air patches (see Nikolaidou 

et al. (2024) and Figure 7b) and DR increases monotonically with 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 (see also Figure 10). Subsequently, as 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 increases further, DR starts to plateau around DR=60% where the ALR is achieved. With respect to drag reduction for these cases ( 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 > 40 l/min), the trend with increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 is overall very similar for all velocities tested here and follows the monotonic increase and plateauing discussed above (Figure 10). There are however two main differences observed, as freestream velocity increases from 2 to 5 m/s. First, a decreasing slope for the DR curves (for 8% < 𝐷 𝑅 < 60% in Figure 10), and second, a progressive reduction in the rate of DR increase to almost zero (constant DR), for 𝐷 𝑅 > 60%. Since these two refer to the transitional and ALR regimes, respectively, we will discuss each of them in succession, in conjunction with the corresponding imaging data and image processing results. 

Bubbly/Transitional regime ( 8% ≤ 𝐷 𝑅 ≤ 60% )

Despite the similar, monotonic increase in DR for all 𝑈 ∞, there is a distinct decrease in slope, indicating a lower rate of DR increase with 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 for higher velocities. For instance, 

𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 90 l/min is needed for 𝑈 ∞ = 2 m/s to reach a 𝐷 𝑅 = 40%, while for 𝑈 ∞ = 3.5m/s and 𝑈 ∞ = 5 m/s these become 130 l/min and 200 l/min, respectively (Figure 14). As mentioned above, an increase in 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 also leads to a coalescence of bubbles and the appearance of larger air patches, which then contribute to DR by an increase in non-wetted area (Figure 9). From the above (and also our observations in Nikolaidou et al. (2024)) it is then to be expected, that such a transition will happen at a slower rate as 𝑈 ∞ increases. From the available imaging data, both from the wall-parallel as well as the wall-normal imaging planes, this can indeed be seen (Figure 15). For the same DR percentage (40%), a transitional topology is particularly clear for the lowest velocity (see Figure 15a), where air patches, separated by liquid films, but forming a single wall-normal layer, are seen very close to the wall. The situation shifts as 𝑈 ∞ increases to 3.5 m/s, with the outer boundary of the air phase becoming more deformed, and bubbles appearing around it 

0 X0-21 Nikolaidou et al. 

Figure 14. Slopes of the drag reduction curves within the transitional regime. Horizontal dashed line corresponds to 𝐷 𝑅 = 40%. air patch liquid film air patch 

(a) 𝑈 ∞ = 2 m/s & 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 80 l/min 

(b) 𝑈 ∞ = 3.5 m/s & 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 130 l/min 

(c) 𝑈 ∞ = 5 m/s & 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 200 l/min 

Figure 15. Characteristic transitional regime images ( 𝑥 − 𝑧 & 𝑥 − 𝑦 plane) corresponding to 𝐷 𝑅 ≈ 40% for three representative 𝑈 ∞. Flow is from right to left in all panels. 

(Figure 15b). For the highest velocity, only a dense layer of bubbles is present (5 m/s, Figure 15c), indicating that a transitional regime might not have been reached despite the very high 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 involved. Distinguishing between a bubbly and a transitional regime therefore becomes very challenging. Thus, when also taking into account the topology from Figure 13, it becomes clear that for the low velocities, the initially drag increasing bubbles flatten due to shear, coalesce and lead to a fast rate of DR for 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 > 40 l/min, while for the very high velocities, the (slower) monotonic increase in DR is linked instead to an increasingly denser packing and minimal coalescence of much smaller bubbles. 

0 X0-22 Journal of Fluid Mechanics air injector 

Figure 16. Instantaneous image of the air layer regime for 𝑈 ∞ = 2 m/s. The mean air layer thickness 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 is measured in the middle of the test section (84 cm downstream of the injection location) and initial air layer thickness 𝑡 𝑖𝑛 𝑗 is measured close to the injector (6.2 cm downstream). tinj  (mm) , (deg.) 

(a) (b) Figure 17. (a) Air layer thickness close to the injector 𝑡 𝑖𝑛 𝑗 and exit angle 𝜃 for 𝑈 ∞ = 2 m/s (see also Figure 16 for definitions). The vertical dashed line indicates 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 . (b) Mean air layer thickness 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 development for increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 for multiple 𝑈 ∞. Only 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 > 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 is shown, meaning that the air layer is formed. Error bars are the standard deviation due to the physical variation in thickness. 

Air Layer regime ( 𝐷 𝑅 ≥ 60% )

As mentioned above, for the last regime of drag reduction, all cases reach a plateau starting at 𝐷 𝑅 = 60%. The main difference across the velocities tested, is that for the highest ones, drag reduction shows a marginal increase with 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 (absolute change approximately 5%), while for low velocities, a much larger increase is observed (approximately 15%, Figure 10). Here we leverage wall-parallel imaging data downstream of the injector and wall-normal ones both in the middle of the plate as well as close to the injector for some more quantitative discussions (Figure 16). The goal is twofold: first to characterize the topology of the ALR and how it varies with 𝑈 ∞, something that is lacking in current literature. Secondly, to evaluate whether there are any links between that topology and DR. Specifically, we examine the air layer thickness and its coherence. As both affect the non-wetted area, they could lead to changes in DR. 

0 X0-23 Nikolaidou et al. 

Towards that end, we first employ an edge detection algorithm on the wall-normal imaging planes to identify the outer boundary of the air layer. This allows us to estimate the air layer thickness at the middle of the test section, 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 (Figure 16), and both the initial air layer thickness, 𝑡 𝑖𝑛 𝑗 , and its exit angle, 𝜃 near the injector, where the air jet bends towards the wall due to buoyancy and the liquid momentum (see Figure 16). air injector                                

> (a) 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 =100 l/min air injector (b) 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =170 l/min > 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 air injector
> (c) 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 =180 l/min air injector (d) 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =240 l/min > 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡
> Figure 18. Characteristic images of wetted pockets near the injector at 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 and 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 > 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 for 𝑈 ∞
> = 2.5 m/s (a) & (b) and 𝑈 ∞= 4 m/s (c) & (d). A wetted patch is indicated in (a) for clarity.

Close to the injector, when looking at the evolution of both the thickness and the exit angle of the air phase, minimal variation is observed with increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 (while only 

𝑈 ∞ = 2 m/s is shown, this behavior is similar in all other velocities), especially in the ALR regime (Figure 17a). A slight decrease in exit angle and increase in 𝑡 𝑖𝑛 𝑗 is seen for 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 < 40 l/min, associated with the slight increase in bubble diameter and bubble coalescence behavior as discussed in the previous section. Thus, while from a topological perspective, the robustness of the exit geometry of the air phase is of note, it cannot be meaningfully linked with the observed increase in DR for the low velocities. Moving to the estimates of the air layer thickness at the middle of the plate, 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 , the first thing to observe is that 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 ≈ 1.5𝑡 𝑖𝑛 𝑗 , indicating a growth in air layer thickness along the plate, similar for all 𝑈 ∞ (Figure 17b). The second thing to note is that for lower velocities, there is an increase in 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 as 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 increases (we should repeat here that since the focus is on the ALR, we only look at 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 > 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 ). For 𝑈 ∞ = 2 m/s a relative increase of nearly 75% is calculated, whereas higher velocities yield substantially smaller values. While this trend does mirror the one observed in DR, where an increase of about 15% was observed, and an increase in ALR thickness would be associated with a DR increase (given the increase in non-wetted area in the side fences), the variation observed in 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 is not significant enough to fully explain it. More specifically, the 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 growth corresponds to a 3 .4% increase in terms of non-wetted area which is minimal considering the DR growth rate with 𝐴 𝑛𝑤 

(Figure 9). Consequently, the observed increase in DR past 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 for low velocities is associated to an increase in air layer thickness (away from the injector), and can be partly be attributed to the resulting increase in non-wetted area, yet there must other factors responsible. 

0 X0-24 Journal of Fluid Mechanics 

One of these factors is the level of embedment of the air layer within the liquid TBL (the ratio 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 /𝛿 ), which has been shown to have a significant effect on the air phase topology (Nikolaidou et al. 2024; Zverkhovskyi 2014) and is particularly relevant in full-scale applications where 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 /𝛿 ≪ 1. For the two lower velocities, this embedment decreases with 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 since the air layer thickness increases. Based on our single phase measurements (see section 3), for 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 90 l/min we estimate 𝑡 𝑖𝑛 𝑗 /𝛿 ≈ 0.5 close to the injector and 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 /𝛿 = 0.165 in the middle of the plate. This is assuming the same TBL growth with and without air, which is unlikely. However, it still provides a rough estimate of embedment. These ratios become 0.47 and 0.27 respectively, at the highest air flow rate. The higher 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 /𝛿 ratio, indicates that the air/water interface is further away from the wall and thus encounters a much lower turbulent activity within the TBL. That is expected to act favorably in terms of drag reduction (see also next paragraph), aligning with the 𝐷 𝑅 

increase measured for these velocities and air flow rates. This indicates a compound effect of the 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 increase: larger non-wetted area and lower turbulent activity within the TBL disturbing the interface. For the higher velocities, the 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 /𝛿 ratios are almost constant since the air layer thickness does not vary appreciably with 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 . Thus no effect in 𝐷 𝑅 is expected, aligning again with the relatively unchanged measured 𝐷 𝑅 with increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 

(Figure 10). Finally, we turn our attention towards the wall-parallel imaging planes, where clear topological differences are observed between low ( 𝑈 ∞ = 2.5 m/s, Figure 18a, 18b) and high velocities ( 𝑈 ∞ = 4 m/s, Figure 18c and 18d). For the latter, the air layer interface is much more deformed, with signs of small scale features, a clear effect of higher Reynolds number and thus turbulent activity, not seen in the lower velocity cases. Yet, increasing 

𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 past 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 does not lead to any observable change in that topology. On the other hand, for the lower velocities, at 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 , while several small scale features persist deforming the air-water interface, these are significantly decreased for 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 > 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 : as mentioned above, this can be attributed to a larger 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 , protruding further in outer region of the TBL, such that the interface is exposed to a lower liquid turbulent activity. In addition, for 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 , several wetted pockets are observed close to the injector, locally breaking the spanwise coherence of the air layer (Figure 18a). These liquid gaps, reflecting high speed streaks upstream of the injector (see Laskari (2025)), also shrink considerably in the lower velocities with increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 . This leads to a much smoother and undisturbed interface (Figure 18b). Linking back to the DR behavior of these cases, a decrease in wetted pockets with increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 and a smoother air –liquid interface accompany the increase in DR for the low velocities. This results in a higher maximum drag reduction ( 𝐷 𝑅 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ≈ 75%) than that achieved for 𝑈 ∞ = 5 m/s ( 𝐷 𝑅 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ≈ 65%), despite a similar maximum 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 (Figure 17b). For the higher velocities, the air-liquid interface is significantly more deformed and at smaller scales than for lower 𝑈 ∞, owing to the much higher Re number. This topology that varies little with increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 beyond the critical one, mirroring again the almost constant DR levels observed for that velocity. Thus, expanding on the discussion above regarding the air layer thickness, we can also safely assume here that the observed drag behavior for 𝐷 𝑅 > 60% as 𝑈 ∞ increases can also be partly attributed to the changes in the air layer spanwise integrity and local breakup. To conclude this section, although a detailed analysis of the air layer instability mechanisms is beyond the scope of this work, some additional observations regarding the integrity of the air –water interface (Figure 19) will also be highlighted. Connecting these to 𝐷 𝑅 is more challenging than our discussion above, yet they have been identified as having the potential to promote air layer breakup and thus drag increase. Both normal and shear stresses originating from the liquid phase can contribute to interface deformation and eventual rupture: the former may increase interface curvature, while the latter could 

0 X0-25 Nikolaidou et al.         

> (a) (b) Figure 19. Morphological features of the air-water interface on the wall-normal plane (a) and the wall-parallel plane (b). Air bubbles are indicated in green and water droplets in blue. This is for 𝑈 ∞=2 m/s and 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =100 l/min.

cause local wetting and disruption of the air layer. Wall-normal imaging revealed the existence of air bubbles near the air –water interface, likely originating from a partial layer breakage (green in Figure 19a). These bubbles, while consistently present, become more frequent with increasing 𝑈 ∞. The same features can be observed in the wall-parallel imaging (green in Figure 19b). Additionally, lighter-perimeter features (blue in Figure 19b) can be observed in the same wall parallel images. It is hypothesized that these are formed due to the wetted patches near the injector discussed earlier. When such a patch forms, the liquid is temporarily wetting the top wall, leaving behind small droplets. These droplets are then advected downstream by the air flow and eventually fall into the air –water interface, creating these lighter-perimeter features. While the exact contribution of these features to drag reduction cannot be quantified here, they are highlighted as potential areas of exploration in future studies. 

5. Air injection - Subcritical conditions 

In the previous section, we discussed the topology of all the air phase regimes and the resulting drag reduction performance for freestream velocities corresponding to supercritical conditions ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1). Here we extend the parameter space to subcritical conditions by lowering 𝑈 ∞ to reach 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≤ 1. The motivation stems from the different air phase topology observed in our earlier work (Nikolaidou et al. 2024) compared to the one presented in section 4. More specifically, for the same air injector geometry, an air cavity of a limited length was observed for the highest air flow rates, instead of the unbounded air layer described in the current study. The hypothesis is that the governing parameter for this topology change is the 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 number. Although many previous studies focused on one of the two topologies, the transition has not been explicitly showcased. To begin with, we look at drag reduction for 𝐹 𝑑 ≤ 1 (colored lines in Figure 20), together with the lowest velocity from the supercritical regime for comparison (black line in Figure 20). Based on the overall trends, two different families of drag reduction curves are observed: one for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≥ 0.73 and one for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≤ 0.54. We will discuss each one in what follows. For 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≥ 0.73, the curves follow a supercritical behavior similar to the one observed for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1 in section 4: relatively slower initial increase of DR with 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 

(positive curvature) and a stabilization around a maximum DR. As also seen in section 4.2.2, this 𝐷 𝑅 𝑚𝑎𝑥 increases monotonically with decreasing 𝑈 ∞, with values here reaching approximately 93% for the lowest freestream velocity of this family ( 𝑈 ∞ = 1.26m/s), as opposed to approximately 66% for the highest one ( 𝑈 ∞ = 5.5 m/s in section 4.2.2) for 

0 X0-26 Journal of Fluid Mechanics     

> Figure 20. Drag reduction curves, for different 𝑈 ∞. The black line ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 =1.24) from Figure 10 is included for comparison.

𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1. Finally, in alignment with BDR observations from section 4.2.1, drag increases (𝐷 𝑅 < 0) at low air flow rates and the magnitude the minimum DR increases with decreasing 𝑈 ∞. Thus, the lowest velocity of this family ( 𝑈 ∞ = 1.26 m /s), exhibits the best ALR performance ( 𝐷 𝑅 = 93%) and the worst BDR one ( 𝐷 𝑅 = −16%). Since neither a better DR performance for ALR nor a higher drag increase for BDR are reached for lower 

𝑈 ∞, this case corresponds to the best and worst performances respectively, across all cases. Shifting now our attention to the DR trends of the second family of curves ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≤ 0.54 in Figure 20), there are some distinct differences in behavior. Drag reduction still increases with 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 but at a steeper initial rate (negative curvature) for all 𝑈 ∞. For the highest 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 

tested, there is also no DR plateau as observed for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≥ 0.73 for the air flow rates tested. Finally, although there is still a drag increase measured for the lowest air flow rates (BDR), as also observed for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≥ 0.73, its magnitude decreases as 𝑈 ∞ decreases, to eventually disappear for the lowest velocities tested. Based on the DR behavior alone, it becomes clear that a transition takes place between 0.54 ≤ 𝐹𝑟 𝑑,𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 ≤ 0.73, with the family of DR curves belonging to 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≥ 0.73 still closely following supercritical behavior. Using the dispersion relation for gravity waves, we estimate that 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≈ 0.61 demarcates deep from intermediate/shallow water conditions (see Zverkhovskyi 2014; Nikolaidou et al. 2024). This is right in the middle of the transition range extracted from the DR curves, indicating that the deviation from deep water conditions is associated with the different DR behavior. From a topological perspective, for deep water conditions and air injection behind a cavitator, it has been shown that the air layer length is limited, stable, and equal to one half of the gravity wavelength (Matveev (2003) and Butuzov (1966, 1967)). The same was also observed for vertical injection without a cavitator in our previous work (Nikolaidou et al. 2024) for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 0.4. Thus in the current study, a bounded air cavity of a certain length would be expected for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 0.61, while for larger 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 deep water conditions are no longer satisfied and the theoretical cavity length would increase to approach infinity. As a result, an unbounded air layer would be expected similar to what was observed in section 4.2.2 for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1. In what follows, we will assess 

0 X0-27 Nikolaidou et al. air air water air air 3 cm air injector 

(a) 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 = 0.28 water air air air 3 cm air injector 

(b) 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 = 0.33 water 3 cm air air air injector 

(c) 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 = 0.39 3 cm 

water air air air air injector 

(d) 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 = 0.54 air air injector 3 cm 

(e) 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 = 0.73 

Figure 21. Characteristics images of the air layer regime for (a) 𝑈 ∞ = 0.47 m/s and 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 20 l/min, (b) 

𝑈 ∞ = 0.57 m/s and 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 40 l/min, (c) 𝑈 ∞ = 0.67 m/s and 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 40 l/min, (d) 𝑈 ∞ = 0.93 m/s and 

𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 40 l/min and (e) 𝑈 ∞ = 1.26 m/s and 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 60 l/min. From top to bottom 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 increases and there is a transition from air cavity to an air layer. The red vertical line indicates the air cavity closure in (a)–(d). In (e) the air layer is unbounded. 

whether this indeed persists down to 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≈ 0.61 and whether a transition to a bounded cavity occurs for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 0.61, accompanying the change in DR behavior. 

0 X0-28 Journal of Fluid Mechanics 

To that end, instantaneous images of the air phase are subsequently assessed (Figure 21). It is immediately apparent that: a) for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 0.61 an unbounded air layer is formed, similar to the one observed for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1 (Figure 21e) and b) for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 0.61 the air layer’s streamwise continuity is broken throughout the entire width (Figure 21d), gradually transitioning to a stable, bounded cavity (Figures 21a,21b, 21c) as 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 decreases. This confirms our DR-based classification of the 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 regimes and we showcase this transition for the first time using both drag reduction and imaging data. At a second level, what can also be seen is that a steady, bounded cavity becomes clearer for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 0.4, with its length increasing with increasing 𝑈 ∞ (as predicted by the dispersion relation), matching our earlier results (Nikolaidou et al. 2024) remarkably well (different facility, same injection system). Further agreement with results from that study is seen with respect to shedding: an air pinch-off mechanism from two side branches is also observed here. Likely due to the narrower width of the current facility, these branches are also seen to intermittently coalesce here, leading to large non-wetted areas further downstream of the main cavity. Finally, the bubbly and transitional regimes (images not shown here) exhibit similar topological features across all cases and also match those of 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1 in section 4. Within BDR, increasing 𝑈 ∞,leads to smaller size bubbles, as expected and seen also in the 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1 cases (Figure 12c). From side view imaging data, it is also confirmed that the bubbles are positioned within a single-bubble layer in the vertical direction, for all cases. Linking the air phase topology with drag reduction can help us better understand the underlying mechanisms of DR. In particular, what is clearly highlighted from the available data, is the balance between air layer coverage (or non-wetted area) and interface integrity. By expanding our supercritical results here to a 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 ≥ 0.73 range, we confirmed that by further decreasing 𝑈 ∞, a monotonic increase of maximum DR is achieved (from a 

𝐷 𝑅 𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 66% for 𝑈 ∞ = 5.5 m /s to a 𝐷 𝑅 𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 93% for 𝑈 ∞ = 1.26 m /s), although the corresponding air coverage is mostly unchanged (and the thickness variation negligible). What does change is the Reynolds number across the cases, reflected as a marked variability of the interface smoothness (compare Figure 21e with Figure 18): a lower Reynolds number TBL leads to a much smoother interface which is much less prone to local breakups, and is associated with higher DR. This is also supported by observations at the 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 0.4 regime. In this case, an air cavity with spanwise coherence is formed, whose length extends only a few centimeters downstream of the air injector (Figure 21c). Beyond this point, the cavity breaks up into large air patches separated by liquid. These smooth patches however appear to still have a significant effect in reducing the drag, since higher levels of drag reduction are measured in this topology ( 𝐷 𝑅 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ≈ 80% for 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 70 l /min) compared to cases where a streamwise continuous but strongly deformed interface is present (eg. 𝐷 𝑅 𝑚𝑎𝑥 < 75% for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 = 1.24 and 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 > 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 ). We should note here that, due to the global nature of the drag measurements employed, there are other factors (related to the areas of the plate which could not be covered by air) potentially contributing to the observed Reynolds number dependency. Thus, while our focus is on the air phase changes observed which can be meaningfully linked to the global drag reduction, reconstructing the full picture with all causal relationships involved, would require further (and more targeted) measurements. Finally, a comment is warranted regarding full-scale applications. While the low velocities used here to attain subcritical conditions are not representative of the ship scales, the resulting deep water conditions ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 0.61) are. However, due to facility limitations, most laboratory studies either satisfy deep water conditions with lower velocities (Nikolaidou et al. 2024; Qin et al. 2019; Zverkhovskyi 2014) or reach higher freestream velocities (and thus Reynolds numbers) but within intermediate or shallow water regimes (Elbing et al. 2008; Barbaca et al. 2019). When both deep water conditions and high freestream velocities are present (as is the case in realistic ship conditions), based  

> 0X0-29

Nikolaidou et al.             

> Figure 22. Regime map. Transitional air flow rate 𝑞 𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑛𝑠 and critical air flow rate 𝑞 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 demarcating the transition from bubbly regime (BR) to transitional regime (TALR) and from TALR to air layer regime (ALR) respectively. Measurements of the current study are shown along with measurements from Elbing et al. (2008) and Nikolaidou et al. (2024). Air flow rates are corrected accounting for the local pressure and density at the injection location and are given per meter width ( 𝑞 𝑎𝑖𝑟 =𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 /𝐵 ).

on the current analysis an air cavity would be expected, but the effect of high Reynolds number on it remains unclear. 

6. Regime map 

In the previous sections, results were presented for both subcritical and supercritical conditions, in which three air phase regimes were consistently observed: the bubbly regime (BR), the transitional air layer regime (TALR) and the air layer/air cavity regime (ALR). The air flow rates that demarcate the transition from BR to TALR ( 𝑞 𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑛𝑠 ) and from the TALR to ALR ( 𝑞 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 ) are presented over a wide range of 𝑈 ∞ (Figure 22; note that the air flow rate per meter width 𝑞 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 /𝐵 is used here instead). In order to investigate any global trends, data from our study are shown together with those from Elbing et al. (2008) and Nikolaidou et al. (2024). While the experimental facilities used for these studies differ significantly in size and capabilities, in all of them a flat plate with a slot-type air injector was used. In addition, the definition of 𝑞 𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑛𝑠 and 𝑞 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 also differs between them. Elbing 

et al. (2008) defined them based on a drag reduction level of 20% and 80% respectively. In Nikolaidou et al. (2024) the classification was made based on the non-wetted area coverage. In the current study, 𝑞 𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑛𝑠 was defined qualitatively from the imaging data, while 𝑞 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 

was defined based on the drag reduction and air flow rate measurement trends ( 𝐷 𝑅 curve asymptotically reaching a maximum level, see Figures 10 and 20). Despite all that, the transition points seem to follow the same trend across a wide range of 𝑈 ∞. The transitional and critical air flow rates roughly follow a quadratic relation with 𝑈 ∞.6.1. Scaling of the critical air flow rate 

Finally, the focus is shifted to the critical air flow rate, 𝑞 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 . This air flow rate needed for transition to an air layer is important since the ALR is the most desired regime in terms of drag reduction. Thus, predicting 𝑞 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 is crucial for industrial air lubrication systems 

0 X0-30 Journal of Fluid Mechanics    

> Figure 23. Froude-depth number versus non-dimensional air flow rate. The local velocity 𝑈 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 at the air-water interface is used for the velocity scale. The dashed vertical line demarcates the shallow/intermediate conditions (to the right) from deep water conditions (to the left).

and yet, despite a large number of air lubrication studies, there is still no universal scaling available, posing a significant challenge in applying laboratory scale findings to the real life application. In this section, a scaling is proposed based on the parameters that appear to play a significant role. For this purpose, the 𝑈 ∞ − 𝑞 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 data points from Figure 22, are reused here, in a non-dimensional form. For the velocity scale, the 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 number is used for normalization, which was previously shown to dictate the air phase topology for 𝑞 𝑎𝑖𝑟 > 𝑞 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 (see section 5). The critical air flow rate per meter width 𝑞 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 , is normalized with the slot width of the air injector, 𝑡 and the local velocity 𝑈 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 . It should be noted that, the resulting coefficient, 

𝐶 𝑄 = 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 /( 𝐵𝑡𝑈 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ), can be interpreted as the ratio of a mean air injection velocity with a local liquid velocity ( 𝑈 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ). Increasing 𝑡 enhances coalescence of the air phase and favors the transition to the ALR, resulting in a lower 𝑞 crit for larger 𝑡 . This agrees well with visual observations during our experiments but further studies targeting the effect of the slot width are needed. 𝑈 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 is the liquid flow velocity at 𝑦 = 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 . For small-scale experiments where 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 ≈ 𝛿 it is reasonable to expect 𝑈 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ≈ 𝑈 ∞, but for smaller 𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑟 /𝛿 

ratios (which is also the case in full-scale ships), 𝑈 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 << 𝑈 ∞. Local flow velocities were also used in our previous study to explain incoming TBL differences: a large 𝑈 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 (closer to 𝑈 ∞) implies a smaller incoming TBL thickness which is shown to promote transition to the ALR (Nikolaidou et al. 2024). As such, 𝑈 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 was also chosen here for normalization, to take into account the effect of local flow conditions rather than freestream ones. For the results in our previous study (Nikolaidou et al. 2024), 𝑈 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 measurements were available, for the current ones, an approximation was made based on separate LDA measurements (Nikolaidou et al. 2026) and for Elbing et al. (2008) an approximation was made based on the available velocity data at Etter et al. (2005). The resulting non-dimensional plot (Figure 23) highlights a vastly different trend between shallow/intermediate and deep water conditions (separated by a dashed vertical line). A steeper slope is shown for the latter, while for shallow water conditions ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 0.61) only a very small increase of 𝐶 𝑄 with 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 remains, with the normalization successfully 

0 X0-31 Nikolaidou et al. 

bounding all data points to within 0 .6 < 𝐶 𝑄 < 0.9. It is good to keep in mind that in absolute terms this corresponds to a very large range of air flow rates (44 l/min to 15662 l/min) and freestream velocities (0.57 m/s to 13.3 m/s). While the proposed scaling looks promising, further experiments should be undertaken with different flat plate widths and slot widths to test this further. In addition, the role of other parameters such as roughness should be also examined and potentially added to the scaling as proposed by Peifer et al. 

(2020). 

> 7. Summary & Conclusions

Friction drag reduction via air lubrication of a flat plate TBL is studied via direct measurements of the drag force and synchronous imaging data. Measurements were performed over a large range of Reynolds numbers (by varying 𝑈 ∞) and air flow rates (𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 ) to assess the effect of freestream velocity. This provided insight in the physical mechanisms of drag reduction via linking the air phase topology and the resulting drag. Simultaneous measurements of the drag force of the flat plate and imaging of the total air coverage along the plate are performed for 2 m/s and across all three air phase regimes. It is found that drag reduction lags significantly behind the non-wetted area coverage at all cases and no simple correlation exists between the two parameters. A bubbly regime (BR) is identified for low 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 . Bubble sizes are quantified via AI-based zero-shot image segmentation. The bubble size distribution becomes narrower and the mean bubble size decreases with 𝑈 ∞, an effect which relaxes for 𝑈 ∞ > 3m/s. For all cases the bubble size varies from millimeters to centimeters. Bubbles are found to increase the drag for 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 < 20 l/min and 0 .67m /s < 𝑈 ∞ < 2.5m /s, with a peak for 𝑈 ∞ = 1.26m /s. This drag increase is associated with a specific bubble organization over the wall-normal: bubbles residing in a single layer parallel to the wall. However, for 𝑈 ∞ > 2.5m/s bubbles disperse over the vertical and start to effectively decrease the drag. Further increasing the air flow rate results in the creation of air patches (TALR) and ultimately in the formation of an air layer (ALR) that extends beyond the test section length (for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1 cases). The onset of this air layer at 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 𝑄 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 is marked by a 60% drag reduction, irrespectively of 𝑈 ∞. Further increasing the air flow rate within the ALR, results in an increase of drag reduction for the lower 𝑈 ∞. By examining both wall-parallel and wall-normal images it is clear that this is accompanied by an increase the air layer thickness and its surface continuity. Both of these are expected to contribute to the drag reduction increase. On the other hand, for higher 𝑈 ∞, increasing 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 within the ALR has a marginal effect on drag reduction accompanied by a marginal change in the air layer thickness and free surface continuity. In general, within the ALR, higher drag reduction levels are achieved for the lower velocities despite the similar non-wetted area coverage of all air layers. This behavior can be at least partially attributed to the lower susceptibility of the interface to breakup: a low Reynolds number TBL is associated with a much smoother air-liquid interface, with no deformations affecting its integrity. The topology of the air phase regimes for 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 0.7 is found to be similar to the supercritical ones ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 > 1). A big morphological difference is found for subcritical flow conditions pertaining to the deep water regime ( 𝐹𝑟 𝑑 < 0.61) however. In this regime the unbounded air layer transitions to an air cavity of a certain thickness and length. The Froude-depth number is then showcased to dictate this morphology transition. Finally, comparing the critical air flow rate to other ones from literature reveals a uniform trend across different scales, hinting at the absence of scaling effects. A new scaling of the critical air flow rate is suggested using the local velocity near the air layer, the slot width  

> 0X0-32

Journal of Fluid Mechanics 

of the injector and the Froude-depth number. This scaling allows for a critical flow rate prediction across a wide range of scales. 

Funding This work is part of the public –private research program “Water Quality in Maritime Hydrodynamics” (AQUA) project P17-07. The support by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) Domain Applied and Engineering Sciences, and project partners is gratefully acknowledged. 

Declaration of interests The authors report no conflict of interest. 

Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge the technical staff of the Ship Hydromechanics Laboratory at Delft University of Technology (in particular Sebastian Schreier, Peter Poot and Pascal Taudin Chabot) for their assistance in the successful execution of the experiments. 

Data availability statement Selected data will be uploaded at the 4TU research data repository. The Machine Learning algorithm used for bubble segmentation is openly available at https://github.com/ AliRKhojasteh/Bubble_segmentation .

Appendix A. Repeatability of air lubrication measurements 

Since the repeatability/precision error was assessed based on single phase flow conditions, in order to estimate the repeatability of multiphase flow measurements, repeated measurements are performed for various freestream velocities and air flow rates (Figure 24). It can be seen that for almost all conditions a good repeatability is achieved across all three regimes. Only in the case of 3 m/s and within the transitional regime, the repeated measurements lie outside the experimental uncertainty (due to the bias error). That is likely due to the highly dynamic nature of this air phase topology introducing additional effects, rather than the measurement technique. 

(a) 𝑈 ∞ = 2.5 m/s (b) 𝑈 ∞ = 3 m/s 

(c) 𝑈 ∞ = 3.5 m/s (d) 𝑈 ∞ = 5.5 m/s 

Figure 24. Repeatability of drag force measurements for various air flow rates for (a) 𝑈 ∞=2.5 m/s, (b) 𝑈 ∞=3 m/s, (c) 𝑈 ∞=3.5 m/s and (d) 𝑈 ∞=5.5 m/s. 

0 X0-33 Nikolaidou et al. 

Appendix B. Additional bubble size distributions 

Additional bubble size distributions obtained at higher 𝑈 ∞ than the one shown in Figure 12b reveal a consistent trend: both the bubble size distribution and the mean values of 𝑑 𝑏 decrease with increasing 𝑈 ∞ (Figure 25). This indicates that the bubble sizes become more uniform. Furthermore, the mode is again mostly insensitive to 𝑄 𝑎𝑖𝑟 (≈ 3 − 4 mm) and approximately equal to the injector slot width ( 𝑡 = 4 mm). 

(a) 𝑈 ∞ = 3.5 m/s (b) 𝑈 ∞ = 5 m/s 

Figure 25. Probability distribution of the bubble diameter ( 𝑑 𝑏 ) for various air flow rates within the bubbly regime. 

0 X0-34 Journal of Fluid Mechanics 

REFERENCES 

Arndt, R. E.A., Hambleton, W. T., Kawakami, E. & Amromin, E. L. 2009 Creation and maintenance of cavities under horizontal surfaces in steady and gust flows. Journal of Fluids Engineering, Transactions of the ASME 131 , 1113011–11130110. 

Barbaca, Luka, Pearce, Bryce W, Ganesh, Harish, Ceccio, Steven L & Brandner, Paul A 2019 On the unsteady behaviour of cavity flow over a two-dimensional wall-mounted fence. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 

874 , 483–525. 

Biswas, Subhajit & Govardhan, Raghuraman N 2024 Effects of salt concentration on top wall bubble injection in a turbulent channel flow: bubble dynamics and wall drag reduction. Experiments in Fluids 

65 (3), 34. 

Bose, N, Insel, M, Anzbock, R, Hwangbo, SM, Mewis, F, Steen, S, Toki, N & Zhu, DX 2005 The specialist committee on powering performance prediction-final report and recommendations to the 24th ittc. 

Proceedings of the 24th ITTC .

Butuzov, AA 1966 Limiting parameters of an artificial cavity formed on the lower surface of a horizontal wall. 

Fluid Dynamics 1 (2), 116–118. 

Butuzov, AA 1967 Artificial cavitation flow behind a slender wedge on the lower surface of a horizontal wall. 

Fluid Dynamics 2 (2), 56–58. 

Elbing, Brian R, M ¨ akiharju, Simo, Wiggins, Andrew, Perlin, Marc, Dowling, David R & Ceccio, Steven L 2013 On the scaling of air layer drag reduction. Journal of fluid mechanics 717 , 484–513. 

Elbing, Brian R, Winkel, Eric S, Lay, Keary A, Ceccio, Steven L, Dowling, David R & Perlin, Marc 

2008 Bubble-induced skin-friction drag reduction and the abrupt transition to air-layer drag reduction. 

Journal of Fluid Mechanics 612 , 201–236. 

Etter, Robert J, Cutbirth, J Michael, Ceccio, Steven L, Dowling, David R & Perlin, Marc 2005 High reynolds number experimentation in the us navy’s william b morgan large cavitation channel. Measurement Science and Technology 16 (9), 1701. 

Ferrante, Antonino & Elghobashi, Said 2004 On the physical mechanisms of drag reduction in a spatially developing turbulent boundary layer laden with microbubbles. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 503 , 345–355. 

Gabillet, C., Colin, C. & Fabre, J. 2002 Experimental study of bubble injection in a turbulent boundary layer. 

International Journal of Multiphase Flow 28 , 553–578. 

Gawandalkar, Udhav U, Lucido, Nicholas A, Jain, Prachet, Poelma, Christian, Ceccio, Steven L & Ganesh, Harish 2025 Examination of ventilated cavities in the wake of a two-dimensional bluff body using x-ray densitometry. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1014 , A14. 

Grigson, CWB. 1999 A planar friction algorithm and its use in analysing hull resistance. Trans RINA .

Henry, Pierre-Yves, Savio, Luca, Koushan, Kourosh, Jenssen, Yngve, Hanssen, Karoline & Brink, Angelika 2023 Characterization of bubble layer lubrication mechanism by means of bubble image velocimetry. In The Advanced Model Measurement Technology for EU Maritime Industry Conference (AMT’23). Istanbul, Turkey .

Hori, Naoki 2024 Numerical Analysis of Turbulent Multiphase Taylor-Couette Flows . University of Twente. 

ITTC 1957 Proceedings of the 8th International Towing Tank Conference . Madrid, Spain: International Towing Tank Conference. 

ITTC 2002 Resistance, Uncertainty Analysis, Example for Resistance Test. ITTC - Recommended Procedures .International Towing Tank Conference. 

ITTC 2017 Uncertainty Analysis, Instrument Calibration. ITTC - Recommended Procedures and Guidelines .International Towing Tank Conference. 

Jacob, B., Oliveri, A., Miozzi, M., Campana, E. F. & Piva, R. 2010 Drag reduction by microbubbles in a turbulent boundary layer. Physics of Fluids 22 , 115104. 

Jang, Jinho, Choi, Soon Ho, Ahn, Sung-Mok, Kim, Booki & Seo, Jong Soo 2014 Experimental investigation of frictional resistance reduction with air layer on the hull bottom of a ship. International Journal of Naval Architecture and Ocean Engineering 6 (2), 363–379. 

Katsui, Tokihiro 2005 The proposal of a new friction line. In Fifth Osaka colloquium on advanced CFD applications to ship flow and hull form design, Osaka, Japan, 2005 .

Khojasteh, Ali R, van de Water, Willem & Westerweel, Jerry 2024 Practical object and flow structure segmentation using artificial intelligence. Experiments in Fluids 65 (8), 119. 

Kim, D & Moin, P 2010 Direct numerical study of air layer drag reduction phenomenon over a backward-facing step. Center for Turbulence Research, Annual Research Briefs pp. 351–363. 

Kirillov, Alexander, Mintun, Eric, Ravi, Nikhila, Mao, Hanzi, Rolland, Chloe, Gustafson, Laura, Xiao, Tete, Whitehead, Spencer, Berg, Alexander C, Lo, Wan-Yen & others 2023 Segment anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pp. 4015–4026. 

K ¨ uc ¸ ¨ uk, Semanur, Della Santina, Cosimo & Laskari, Angeliki 2025 Segmenting the complex and irregular 

0 X0-35 Nikolaidou et al. 

in two-phase flows: A real-world empirical study with sam2. International Journal of Multiphase Flow p. 105557. 

Laskari, Angeliki 2025 Effects of liquid turbulent boundary layer spanwise organisation on air lubrication. 

International Journal of Multiphase Flow p. 105383. 

Lu, Jiacai, Fern ´ andez, Arturo & Tryggvason, Gretar 2005 The effect of bubbles on the wall drag in a turbulent channel flow. Physics of Fluids 17 , 95102. 

Madavan, N K, Deutsch, S & Merkle, C L 1985 Measurements of local skin friction in a microbubble-modified turbulent boundary layer. J. Fluid Mech 156 , 237–256. 

Makiharju, SA, Elbing, Brian R & Perlin, M 2010 Ventilated partial cavity flows at high reynolds numbers. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Multi-phase Flows .

M ¨ akiharju, Simo A, Elbing, Brian R, Wiggins, Andrew, Schinasi, Sarah, Vanden-Broeck, Jean-Marc, Perlin, Marc, Dowling, David R & Ceccio, Steven L 2013 On the scaling of air entrainment from a ventilated partial cavity. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 732 , 47–76. 

Matveev, KI 2003 On the limiting parameters of artificial cavitation. Ocean Engineering 30 (9), 1179–1190. 

McCormick, Michael E & Bhattacharyya, Rameswar 1973 Drag reduction of a submersible hull by electrolysis. Naval Engineers Journal 85 (2), 11–16. 

Mouza, A. A., Dalakoglou, G. K. & Paras, S. V. 2005 Effect of liquid properties on the performance of bubble column reactors with fine pore spargers. Chemical Engineering Science 60 , 1465–1475. 

Murai, Yuichi 2014 Frictional drag reduction by bubble injection. Experiments in fluids 55 (7), 1773. 

Murai, Yuichi, Oishi, Yoshihiko, Takeda, Y & Yamamoto, F 2006 Turbulent shear stress profiles in a bubbly channel flow assessed by particle tracking velocimetry. Experiments in Fluids 41 , 343–352. 

Nikolaidou, Lina, Laskari, Angeliki, van Terwisga, Tom & Poelma, Christian 2024 Effect of incoming flow conditions on air lubrication regimes. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 180 , 104948. 

Nikolaidou, Lina, Laskari, Angeliki, van Terwisga, Tom & Poelma, Christian 2026 Flow characterization of the Delft Multiphase Flow Tunnel, arXiv: 2604.14003. 

Park, Hyun Jin, Tasaka, Yuji, Oishi, Yoshihiko & Murai, Yuichi 2015 Drag reduction promoted by repetitive bubble injection in turbulent channel flows. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 75 , 12–25. 

Peifer, Bradley C, Callahan-Dudley, Christopher & M ¨ akiharju, Simo A 2020 Air layer on superhydrophobic surface for frictional drag reduction. Journal of Ship Research 64 (2). 

Qin, Shijie, Wu, Yue, Wu, Dazhuan & Hong, Jiarong 2019 Experimental investigation of ventilated partial cavitation. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 113 , 153–164. 

Sanders, Wendy C, Winkel, Eric S, Dowling, David R, Perlin, Marc & Ceccio, Steven L 2006 Bubble friction drag reduction in a high-reynolds-number flat-plate turbulent boundary layer. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 552 , 353. 

Schlichting, Hermann 1979 Boundary Layer Theory . New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Shen, Xiaochun, Ceccio, Steven L & Perlin, Marc 2006 Influence of bubble size on micro-bubble drag reduction. Experiments in Fluids 41 (3), 415–424. 

Van Gils, Dennis PM, Guzman, Daniela Narezo, Sun, Chao & Lohse, Detlef 2013 The importance of bubble deformability for strong drag reduction in bubbly turbulent taylor–couette flow. Journal of fluid mechanics 722 , 317–347. 

Verschoof, Ruben A, Van Der Veen, Roeland CA, Sun, Chao & Lohse, Detlef 2016 Bubble drag reduction requires large bubbles. Physical review letters 117 (10), 104502. 

Zverkhovskyi, Oleksandr 2014 Ship drag reduction by air cavities. PhD thesis, TU Delft. 

0 X0-36