Title: 2605.06348v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.06348v1

Published Time: Fri, 08 May 2026 01:21:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 45

Markdown Content:
1

# From Deposition Stress to Surface Reactivity: 

# Strain -Dependent Hydrogen Evolution on Sputtered 

# Platinum Thin Films 

Sabrina Baha 1, Alejandro E. Perez Mendoza 2, Leonardo H. Morais 1, Aleksander Kostka 3, Shivam 

Shukla 2, Ellen Suhr 1, Andre Oliveira 2†, Annika Gatzk i1, Henrik H. Kristoffersen 4, Jan Rossmeisl 4,

Corina Andronescu 2*, Alfred Ludwig 1,3* 

> 1

Material Discovery and Interfaces, Ruhr -University Bochum, Bochum, Germany  

> 2

Chemical Technology III, University Duisburg -Essen, Duisburg, Germany  

> 3

Center for Interface -Dominated High Performance Materials, (ZGH) Ruhr -University Bochum, 

Bochum, Germany  

> 4

Center for High Entropy Alloy Catalysis, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 

KEYWORDS : Platinum, Thin Film, Strain, HER, Electrocatalysis, DFT, Magnetron sputtering 

ABSTRACT 

Strain has emerged as a promising approach for tuning electrocatalytic properties , yet its role in 

sputter -deposited thin films remains poorly understood. In this work , magnetron -sputtered 

platinum (Pt) thin films with different stress states were prepared by varying the sputter pressure. 2

The resulting changes in microstructure, residual strain, and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) 

activity were investigated using complementary characterization techniques and density functional 

theory (DFT ) calculations. Structural analysis reveals a transition of (111) -textured Pt thin films 

from dense and smooth films at low pressures , to more porous microstructures with increased 

roughness at higher pressures. Electrochemical measurements show that films deposited at low 

sputter pressure exhibit the highest HER activity, while higher sputter pressures lead to reduced 

activity despite increased surface area. DFT calculations demonstrate that lattice strain alters 

hydrogen adsorption energetics and surface coverage on Pt(111), providing a mechanistic 

explanation for the observed activity trends. Overall, the results highlight that HER activity in 

sputtered Pt thin films is governed by the interplay of residual strain, microstructure, and hydrogen 

coverage. 

INTRODUCTION 

Platinum (Pt) is a benchmark electrocatalyst for energy conversion systems as it is one of the most 

efficient catalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) [ 1,2] as well as oxygen reduction 

reaction ( ORR ) in acidic electrolyte [3,4]. Its high intrinsic activity originates from its electronic 

structure, which provides near -optimal adsorption energ ies for key reaction intermediates [ 5]. 

Since the electro catalytic performance of a material is strongly determined by the electronic 

configuration of its surface atoms, strategies that tune the electronic structure, such as alloying ,

increasing chemical complexity in high -entropy materials or modifying the local atomic 

coordination at the surface, play a central role in catalyst design [6,7] . Among these approaches ,3

strain engineering has emerged as a powerful concept , as lattice distortions can directly shift the 

d-band center of Pt and thereby modulate adsorption energetics [ 8-11 ]. 

Strain in electrocatalytic materials may arise from lattice mismatch between the substrate and the 

material of interest , structural defects, or externally applied mechanical deformation. Numerous 

studies have demonstrated that both tensile and compressive strain can significantly influence HER 

and ORR kinetics by altering the electronic states of metal catalysts [ 12-18]. For example, He et 

al. demonstrated dynamic control of surface strain in ultrathin Pt shells, achieving lattice strain 

ranging from approximately −5.1% (compressive) to +5.9% (tensile). The best -performing 

catalyst, exhibiting ~2.8% tensile strain, reached a specific activity of 22.71 mA /cm ² at −0.07 V 

vs . RHE, corresponding to a 12.3 -fold enhancement relative to Pt/C [19]. Similarly, tensile strain 

arising from geometric constraints in Pd icosahedra resulted in nearly two -fold higher HER current 

density (−4002 vs . −1929 mA /cm ² at −0.87 V vs . RHE), accompanied by a corresponding doubling 

of turnover frequency (9178 vs . 4427 s ⁻¹), further underscoring the quantitative coupling between 

lattice distortion and HER performance [9]. 

Density functional theory (DFT) play s an important role in understanding electrocatalytic activity 

by using adsorption energies as descriptors for reaction trends [20]. The hydrogen adsorption free 

energy ( ΔGH) is widely used as a key activity descriptor for HER , where optimal electro catalytic 

performance is expected to be obtained for adsorption free energies close to 0 eV [20,21]. On 

Pt(111), hydrogen adsorption energies have been shown to exhibit a pronounced dependence on 

surface coverage due to lateral adsorbate –adsorbate interactions. These interactions are reflected 

in coverage -dependent adsorption energies . Previous studies have shown that hydrogen adsorption 

energies on Pt(111) vary by up to 0.2 eV as the coverage increases to one monolayer, reflecting 4

the progressive weakening of the Pt -H interaction due to repulsive interactions at higher surface 

coverages [22, 23]. Strain provides another systematic means to shift ΔGH on Pt(111). Both tensile 

and compressive strain modify ΔGH through strain -induced changes in the surface electronic 

structure [24,25]. Martínez -Alonso et al. reported that tensile strain strengthens hydrogen 

adsorption on Pt(111), whereas compressive strain weakens it . Across strain ranges from 3% 

compressive strain to 8% tensile strain, adsorption energies shift up to 0.25 eV toward more 

negative values. 

While strain -engineered model systems clearly demonstrate the pronounced sensitivity of 

electrocatalytic activity to subtle changes in atomic spacing, comparatively little attention has been 

paid to the residual stress states that naturally emerge during t he fabrication of thin -film 

electrocatalysts on substrates. In sputter -deposited films, intrinsic stress is inherently linked to the 

typical non -equilibrium growth conditions. Parameters such as sputter pressure and the kinetic 

energy of impinging species govern adatom mobility, grain coalescence, defect incorporation, and 

film densification [2 6–29], ultimately determining whether compressive or tensile residual stress 

develops during film growth. Therefore , films prepared under different sputter conditions can 

exhibit substantially different residual stress states , which manifest as corresponding residual 

strain and ultimately impact electrocatalytic performance . Although previous studies have shown 

that sputter parameters influence morphology, preferred or ientation, and occasionally 

electrochemical behavior of Pt -based thin films [ 30 ], a systematic and quantitative correlation 

between deposition -induced residual strain and electrocatalytic activity has not yet been 

established. Establishing this relationship is critical, as the resulting residual strain constitutes an 

inherent yet often uncontrolled parameter that may significantly influence electro catalytic 

performance , not only of Pt but also possible future compositionally complex catalysts. 5

In this work , we investigate the relationship between residual strain in sputter -deposited Pt thin 

films and their HER activity in acidic electrolyte . Pt thin films were deposited using different 

Argon (Ar) sputter pressures, enabling systematic tuning of the residual stress state and the 

resulting residual strain . The magnitude of the residual stress was quantified using a

microcantilever -based curvature measurement technique ( digital holographic microscopy, DHM) 

[31], providing direct access to the biaxial in -plane s tress . The films were further characterized by 

atomic force microscopy ( AFM ), X-ray diffraction (XRD ), and transmission electron microscopy 

(TEM ) to resolve surface morphology , crystal structure, and microstructural features across 

multiple length scales . HER activity was evaluated in acidic electrolyte using voltam metric 

measurements performed using a scanning droplet cell (SDC), with current densities normalized 

to the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) . To provide theoretical atomistic insight into 

the experimentally observed trends, DFT calculations were performed to evaluate the influence of 

biaxial strain on hydrogen adsorption energetics on Pt(111) . By quantitatively correlating 

deposition -process -induced residual strain with D FT -derived hydrogen adsorption energetics and 

experimentally measured HER activity, we establish a direct multiscale link between thin -film 

growth conditions, elastic lattice distortion, surface electronic structure, and electrocatalytic 

performance. We demonstrate that variations in sputter pressure induce changes in biaxial residual 

strain of ~0.7%, accompanied by variations in overpotential of up to ~77% across the investigated 

pressure range . These findings highlight sputter deposition as a viable strat egy to tune residual 

strain in Pt thin films and thereby modulate their electrocatalytic response. 6

EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 

Fabrication of Pt thin films 

Pt thin films were deposited using a magnetron sputter system (CMS, DCA instruments) equipped 

with a radio frequency (RF) power supply . The base pressure before introducing Ar was below 6.7 

× 10 ⁻⁶ Pa. A Pt target ( 99.99% purity ) was used for film deposition, while a tantalum (Ta) target 

(99.95% purity ) was used as an adhesion layer . All depositions were carried out under identical 

geometric conditions with a target to substrate distance of 10 mm. T he RF power was fixed at 60 

W for all Pt films to ensure comparability between samples. No intentional substrate heating was 

applied during deposition. The Pt films were deposited on to different substrates , including silicon 

(Si) wafer pieces with a 500 nm thermal oxide layer (Si/SiO ₂), Si/SiO ₂ substrates with a 

photolithographically cross -patterned structure for t hickness measurements, and commercial Si 

microcantilever stress sensor chips (Micromotive GmbH) containing 20 μm thick cantilevers with 

a native oxide surface layer for residual stress analysis . During deposition, substrates were rotated 

at 10 rpm to ensure thickness homogeneity. Prior to Pt depositions, all substrates were coated with 

a Tantalum (Ta) adhesion layer of approximately 10 nm thickness. The Ta target was first pre -

cleaned at 150 W for 300 s , followed by Ta deposition at 150 W for 175 s at a spu tter pressure of 

0.67 Pa under Ar (99.9999%) atmosphere. Pt films with a nominal thickness of 60 nm were then 

deposited, yielding a total film thickness of approximately 70 nm , including the Ta adhesion layer. 

The Pt target was pre -cleaned at 50 W for 300 s prior to each deposition. The sputter pressure was 

systematically varied to tune the residual stress state. Pressure was controlled via a throttle valve, 

with increased Ar flow at higher sputter pressures to ensure stable operating conditions. The film 

thickness was adjusted via deposition time based on calibrated sputter rates. Thickness 7

determination is described in the following section. The corresponding sputter parameters are 

summarized in Table 1 .

Table 1. Deposition parameters for Pt thin films deposited by RF magnetron sputtering at constant 

RF power (60 W). Film thickness values represent the total thickness of the Ta adhesion layer and 

Pt layer. 

Sample Sputter Pressure 

(mTorr) 

Sputter Pressure 

(Pa) 

Ar Flow ( ×10 ⁻⁶ 

m³ s⁻¹)

Sputter Rate 

(nm s ⁻¹)

Total 

Thickness 

(Ta + Pt) 

(nm) 

p1 1 0.13 3.33 0.057 69 ± 3 

p2 2 0.27 3.33 0.052 69 ± 3 

p4 4 0.53 3.33 0.052 68 ± 2 

p5 5 0.67 3.33 0.053 69 ± 3 

p6 6 0.80 3.33 0.056 69 ± 4

p7 7 0.93 3.33 0.056 70 ± 3 

p8 8 1.07 3.33 0.052 69 ± 1 

p10 10 1.33 3.33 0.062 72 ± 4 

p12 12 1.60 5.00 0.058 74 ± 3 

p20 20 2.67 6.67 0.067 67 ± 3 

p25 25 3.33 8.33 0.066 53 ± 1

Film Thickness Determination 

The total thin film thickness (Ta + Pt) was determined with a mechanical profilometer (AMBIOS 

XP -1). To enable accurate thickness measurement, a well -defined step edge (cross -pattern) was 8

created by a photolithographic lift -off process prior to deposition. Briefly, selected areas of the 

substrate were protected with a photoresist layer, while the remaining surface was exposed for 

metal deposition. After sputtering, the photoresist was remov ed using acetone , followed by rinsing 

with isopropanol , thereby lifting off the overlying metal and generating sharp step edges between 

coated and uncoated regions. The film thickness was then obtained by scanning across this step 

using profilometry. For e ach sample, at least five measurements were performed at different 

positions across the substrate to ensure statistical reliability. The values reported in Table 1 

correspond to the mean thickness and standard deviation of these measurements . The measured 

total thickness was consistent with the nominal Pt thickness and the Ta adhesion layer described 

above . For sample p25, cross -sectional TE M indicated a lower local film thickness than initially 

obtained by profilometry. A subsequent profilometer recalibration and repeat ed measurements 

confirmed a systematic offset for this sample. The corrected thickness value was therefore used 

for all thickness -dependent analyses. 

Residual Stress Measurement 

The r esidual stress in the thin films was determined using Digital Holographic Microscopy (DHM) 

through measurement of the substrate curvature of the microcantilever stress sensor chip , enabl ing 

extraction of the film -averaged biaxial in -plane residual stress from cantilever deflection. 

Throughout this work , this film -averaged biaxial in -plane residual stress is referred to as residual 

stress unless stated otherwise. The average residual stress in the film , 𝜎 !, was calculated from the 

measured radius of curvature r using the Stoney equation: 

𝜎 ! = 𝑀 "ℎ"

> #

6ℎ!𝑟 

(1) 9

where 𝑀 " = $!

> %&'!

is the biaxial modulus of the substrate with 𝐸 " as the Young's modulus of and 

𝜈 " as the Poisson's ratio of the substrate, respectively , ℎ" and ℎ! are the substrate and film 

thicknesses, respectively [32]. Tensile residual stress corresponds to concave cantilever bending 

(positive curvature), whereas compressive residual stress corresponds to convex bending (negative 

curvature). For each sample, at least ten individual DHM measurements were performed on a 

si ngle stress chip comprising six cantilevers, and the reported stresses represent mean values. The 

corresponding biaxial in -plane elastic strain , 𝜀 ∥, was obtained from : 𝜀 ∥ = 𝜎 ! 𝑀 %%% ⁄ . Based on the 

pronounced (111) texture observed by XRD , the biaxial modulus 𝑀 %%% of Pt(111) was determined 

using the anisotropic elastic expression for cubic crystals under equi -biaxial plane stress conditions 

as given by Freund and Suresh. Using the single -crystal elastic constants of Pt at 300 K (C11 =

346.7 GPa, C 12 = 250.7 GPa, and C 44 = 76.5 GPa ) yields 𝑀 %%% ≈ 337 GPa [3 3,3 4]. 

The total residual stress can be expressed as the sum of intrinsic and thermal contributions , 𝜎 )*) =

𝜎 + + 𝜎 ), + 𝜎 -.) . The intrinsic stress component arises from non -equilibrium film growth processes 

during sputtering , including atomic peening, defect incorporation, grain coalescence, and 

microstructural evolution [35, 36 ]. The thermal stress component results from the mismatch in 

thermal expansion coefficients between film and substrate upon cooling or heating relative to the 

deposition temperature [3 7, 38 ]. Although deposition was performed nominally at room 

temperature, moderate substrate heating during magnetron sputtering cannot be excluded. 

Literature reports substrate temperature increases of several tens of degrees Celsius during 

magnetron sputtering in the absence of active cooling [3 5]. For the Pt/Si system, this would 

correspond to a thermal strain of approximately 0.009%, which is small compared to the 

experimentally determined residual strain values and can therefore be considered negligible. Since 10 

no external mechanical load was applied during curvature measurements and the thermal 

contribution is minor, the measured residual stress predominantly reflects the intrinsic growth 

stress of the films. 

Surface Roughness Analysis 

AFM was used to quantify the surface roughness of all Pt thin films. For each sample, an area of 

1 × 1 μm ² was analyzed to assess potential correlation between morphological and electro catalytic 

performance. Measurements were performed using a scanning probe microscope (FastScan ,

Bruker USA ), operated in PeakForce Tapping mode with ScanAsyst control. The FastScan A S-

probe with a nominal spring constant of 18 N m ⁻¹ was used . The acquired height images were 

processed using NanoScope Analysis software version 1.8, Bruker USA. Prior to roughness 

evaluation, a first order plane correction was applied to remove sample tilt. No additional filtering 

procedures were applied. The arithmetic mean roughness Ra and the root mean square roughness 

Rq were determined from the full 1 × 1 μm ² topography image. The error was estimated as the 

standard deviation of five 300 x 300 nm ² regions of interest within the same image. 

X-ray Diffraction 

XRD was performed to investigate the phase constitution and crystallographic structure of the 

samples using a D8 Discover diffractometer, Bruker USA, equipped with a VANTEC 500 two -

dimensional detector and a Cu K α microfocus radiation source (50 W, I μS, λ = 0. 15406 nm ). Five 

frames were acquired with an exposure time of 60 s per frame over a 2 θ range of 30° - 80° in 

Bragg -Brentano geometry . The resulting two -dimensional diffraction patterns were converted into 

one -dimensional diffractograms using DIFFRAC.EV A software . The incident X -ray beam size 

was defined by a 1 mm collimator with a divergence below 0.007°. The peak layer accuracy of the 11 

instrument was ±0.02 in 2 θ°. The interplanar spacing 𝑑 %%% of the Pt(111) reflection was determined 

from the peak position using Bragg’s law. The out -of -plane strain was calculated as 𝜀 / = (𝑑 %%% −

𝑑 %%% ,1)/𝑑 %%% ,1, where 𝑑 %%% ,1 = 0.2265 nm was used as the stress -free reference value [ 39 ]. 

Transmission Electron Microscopy 

Thin cross -sectional samples (lamellae) for TEM analysis were prepared from selected thin films 

(p1, p2, p7, p8, p12, and p25) , which were chosen to represent different residual strain and 

corresponding HER activities. Lamellae were prepared using a focused ion beam (FIB) system 

(FEI Helios G5 CX) operated at 30 kV. To protect the surface of the material, a carbon layer was 

deposited first, using an electron beam, and then a thicker layer, using an ion beam. The lift -out, 

transfer, and initial thinning of the sample down to 500 nm were performed at 30 kV. From then, 

the accelerating voltage of the ion beam was gradually reduced during the thinning process: first, 

thinning from 500 nm to 200 nm at 16 kV, and finally, thinning to electron transparency was 

performed at 8 kV. TEM characterization was conducted using a JEOL JEM -ARM200F 

(N EOARM) microscope operated at 200 kV. Prior to acquisition of selected area electron 

diffraction (SAED) pattern s, the camera length of the instrument was calibrated using an 

evaporated aluminum film standard . All SAED patterns were acquired using identical condenser, 

objective and projector lens currents to minimize the influence of the experimental setup on the 

determination of the lattice parameters. The lattice parameters were determined from SAED 

patterns by manually selecting the diffraction center and determining peak positions based on their 

full width at half maximum. Interplanar spacings were calculated from the measured peak 

positions and converted to lattice parameters assuming an fcc structure. For each SAED pattern, 

multiple reflections ((111), (200), (220), (311), and (222)) were evaluated, and the resulting lattice 12 

parameters were averaged. To estimate the experimental uncertainty, four independent evaluations 

were performed on a SAED pattern of comparatively low quality, resulting in a standard deviation 

of 0.002 nm. This value is taken as a conservative estimate of the uncertainty of the lattice 

parameter determination. 

Electrochemical Measurements 

The HER activity of the Pt thin films in 0.1 M HClO 4 was evaluated based on linear sweep 

voltammograms (LSVs) recorded using an SDC (Sensolytics GmbH , Germany ) equipped with a 

circular tip opening of 0.0019 cm 2. Proper sealing was ensured by monitoring the applied force, 

which was set to −400 mN after surface contact. The electrochemical setup consisted of a three -

electrode configuration with the Pt thin film as the working electrode, an Ag|AgCl|3 M KCl as the 

reference electrode (Sensolytics GmbH) , and a P t wire as the counter electrode. A 0.1 M HClO 4

solution (prepared from HClO 4 70%, from Sigma) was used as the electrolyte and continuously 

purged with Ar (99.999% purity, Airliquide) . Purging was initiated 20 min prior to the experiment 

to remove dissolved O 2. Additionally, an Ar flow was directed around the capillary opening to 

minimize oxygen diffusion into the droplet during measurements. Three consecutive 

measurements were performed on each Pt surface, and the electrolyte was automatically 

exchanged before each new measurement area was evaluated . The SDC setup allowed automated 

measurements at multiple positions on each sample under comparable experimental conditions, 

and enables a systematic comparison of Pt thin films deposited under different sputter conditions .

Initially, the open circuit potential (OCP) was recorded for 150 s. E lectrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy (EIS) was performed at the OCP using a 10 mV amplitude with 10 points per decade 

in the frequency range of 100 kHz to 1 kHz . The uncompensated resistance (R u) was determined 13 

from the high -frequency intercept of the Nyquist plot with the real impedance axis. Cyclic 

voltammograms (CVs) were recorded from -0.26 to 0.63 V vs . Ag|AgCl|3 M KCl at a scan rate of 

150 mV/s to determine the electrochemical active surface area (ECSA) of the Pt films . The charge 

associated with th e hydrogen desorption was determined by integrati ng the anodic sweep between 

-0.22 and 0.08 V vs . Ag|AgCl|3 M KCl after double layer correction . The ECSA was calculated 

using a conversion factor of 210 μC/cm 2 [40 ]. Subsequently , LSV s were recorded from 0.14 V vs .

Ag|AgCl|3 M KCl to ward negative potential at a scan rate of 100 mV/s until a current of 50 μA

was reached , corresponding to approximately 26 mA/cm 2. This stop criterion was applied to limit 

hydrogen bubble formation that could des tabilize the droplet cell. 

For data presentation, potential s were converted to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) scale 

according to E234 = E56 |5689 |:; =89 + 0.210 + 0.059 × pH − i𝑅 >, where 

E56 |AgCl |3M KCl is the applied potential vs . Ag|AgCl|3 M KCl , 0.210 V is the standard potential 

of the reference electrode at 25 °C, i is the measured current and R u is the uncompensated resistance 

determined by EIS. For ECSA determination, the integrated hydrogen desorption charge after 

double layer capacitance correction was divided by 210 μC/cm 2.

DFT Calculation s

DFT calculations were performed using the revised Perdew –Burke –Ernzerhof (RPBE) [ 41 ]

exchange –correlation functional within the projector augmented wave (PAW) framework, as 

implemented in GPAW [42 ]. A plane wave cutoff energy of 400 eV and a 4 × 4 × 1 Monkhorst –

Pack k point mesh were employed. All geometries were optimized until residual forces below 0.05 

eV Å −1. The Pt(111) surface was modelled as a 3 × 3 × 5 atomic supercell using the Atomic 

Simulation Environment (ASE) [43 ]. Periodic boundary conditions were applied, and a vacuum 14 

region of 2 nm was introduced perpendicular to the slab to avoid spurious slab –slab interactions. 

The two bottom layers were held fixed, while the remaining layers were relaxed until residual 

forces were below 0.05 eV /Å. Biaxial tensile and compressive strain were applied along the x and 

y directions by varying the lateral lattice parameters according to 𝑎 = 𝑎 1(1 + 𝑠 ), where 𝑎 1is the 

equilibrium lattice constant of Pt(111) and 𝑠 denotes the applied strain. Tensile (s > 0) and 

compressive (s < 0) strain were imposed in increments of 0.5%, up to a maximum magnitude of 

1% . Hydrogen adsorption energetics were evaluated within the computational hydrogen electrode 

framework (CHE), enabling first principles evaluation of adsorption thermodynamics. The 

adsorption energy was calculated as 

∆𝐸 ? = 𝐸 @) &? − 𝐸 @) − 1

2 𝐸 ?"

(2)

where 𝐸 @) &? is the total energy of the slab with adsorbed hydrogen, 𝐸 @) is the energy of the clean 

surface, and 𝐸 ?" is the energy of molecular hydrogen in the gas phase. Free energy of adsorption, 

ΔGH, was obtained according to 

∆𝐺 ? = ∆𝐸 ? + ∆𝐸 A@$ − 𝑇 ∆𝑆 ?

(3) 

where ∆𝐸 A@$ corresponds to the difference in zero -point energy between adsorbed hydrogen and 

hydrogen in the gas phase , and 𝑇 ∆𝑆 ? represents the entropic contribution. Gas phase entropy 

values were taken from Atkins [44 ], while adsorbed species contributions followed Nørskov et al. 

[20 ]. This results in a total free energy contribution of 0.24 eV per hydrogen atom at room 

temperature. The CHE formalism was used to incorporate the effect of an applied potential U vs .

RHE , such that the adsorption free energy becomes Δ𝐺 ?(𝑈 ) = Δ𝐺 ? − 𝑒𝑈 . To estimate the HER 

activity , ΔGH was used as an activity descriptor in accordance with the Sabatier principle. The 

HER activity was evaluated using 15 

𝑗 B = 𝐴 𝑒    

> #(%∆'(#∆'*+, %-./ )
> 123

(4) 

where ∆𝐺 *C) = 0 corresponds to the ideal adsorption free energy, e is the elementary charge, is 

the Boltzmann constant, 𝑇 = 298 K is room temperature, and 𝐴 = −0.01 a.u. is a scaling constant 

chosen to reproduce experimentally observed trends [ 45-47]. Potentials were evaluated in the 

range from −0.8 to 0 V versus RHE. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Dependence of thin film morphology and strain on sputter pressure 

The sputter -deposited Pt thin films exhibit a clear transition from compressive to tensile stress with 

increasing sputter pressure, consistent with previous observations [4 8,49 ]. The corresponding 

residual strain exhibits a volcano -shaped dependence on sputter pressure (Fig ure 1). At the lowest 

sputter pressure of 0.27 Pa, the thin film show s a compressive strain of −0.0 34 % ( corresponding 

to a stress of −429 MPa). Increasing the sputter pressure to 1.07 Pa leads to a maximum tensile 

strain of 0. 119 % (481 MP a), resulting in a total residual strain range of ~0.1 5%. Th e change of the 

residual strain with sputter pressure is consistent with the well -established mechanism of energetic 

densification at low pressures (high incident particle energy) and stress relaxation at higher 

pressures due to reduced intercolumnar coupling caused by grain boundary porosity (low incident 

particle energy) [ 50 ]. At low sputter pressures, the mean free path of sputtered species is large, 

allowing Pt atoms and reflected neutral Ar to reach the substrate with substantial kinetic energy. 

This promotes atomic peening, where energetic bombardment leads to local densification [ 51 ,52 ]. 

The dominance of atomic peening under these conditions is c onsistent with the formation of a 

dense Zone T morphology [ 53 ]. At Ar pressures of around 1 Pa, the Pt thin film exhibit s a

pronounced tensile -stress maximum . Th is transition originates from the reduced kinetic energy 16 

and directionality of the sputtered Pt species as the working -gas pressure increases. At higher 

sputter pressures, increased gas -phase scattering is expected to randomize the incidence angles of 

the arriving Pt atoms, thereby reducing the lateral flux coherence and promoting a growth mode 

in which the film’s grains increasingly develop into separated columnar structures . This resulting 

columnar morphology contains separate grain boundaries that interrupt the atomic network and 

reduce the film ’s ability to maintain coherency , thereby enabling relaxation of deposition -induced 

stress . Sim ultaneously, the reduced kinetic energy of the incoming species likely limits surface 

diffusion, causing adatoms to remain close to their initial impact position . Under these conditions, 

surface roughness increases and shadowing effects become increasingly important, leading to 

preferential growth of elevated regions. Such pressure -dependent changes in microstructure and 

residual stress are widely observed in sputtered metals [30, 54-57]. 

Figure 1. Relationship between sputter pressure and residual strain in Pt thin films. Strain values 

were calculated from residual stress measurements obtained by DHM. The horizontal line at y = 0 

represents the unstrained state, and error bars indicate the uncertai nty associated with the DHM -

derived strain values. 

> compressive
> tensile

17 

This microstructural transition is accompanied by systematic changes in surface morphology, as 

evidenced by the AFM measurements shown in Figure 2. The lowest surface roughness is observed 

for the thin film deposited at 0. 27 Pa ( p2; Ra,0. 27 = 0.63 ± 0.01 nm , R q,0. 27 = 0.7 9 nm ± 0.01 nm ), 

whereas the sample grown at 3.33 Pa exhibits the highest surface roughness ( p25; Ra,3.33 = 1.8 0 nm 

± 0.0 7 nm , R q,3.33 = 2.28 nm ± 0.08 nm ). At an Ar pressure of 1.6 Pa, a pronounced increase in 

surface roughness is observed, which coincides with the formation of a columnar microstructure 

that is no longer laterally connected at the surface. AFM images of the remaining samples are 

provided in the Supporting Information (Figure S 1). 

Figure 2. AFM height maps (1 μm × 1 μm) of Pt thin films sputtered at Ar pressures of 0. 27 , 1.07, 

1.6 0, and 3.3 3 Pa, corresponding to samples p2, p8, p12, and p25, respectively. The images reveal 

a progressive increase in surface roughness with increasing sputter pressure. The color scale is 

normalized across all images to allow direct comparison of the surface morp hology. 

XRD measurements provide insight into the structural evolution of the Pt thin films with increasing 

sputter pressure. All films exhibit a dominant Pt(111) reflection corresponding to the (111) plane 18 

of face -centered cubic Pt ( fcc, space group Fm -3m) [ 39]. The measured 2 θ position gradually 

shifts from 39.76° (p1) to 40.09° (p8) and slightly decreases again at higher pressures (Fig. 3a). A 

weaker Pt(222) reflection is also visible for all samples, with 2 θ values ranging from 85.72° to 

86.40°. For thin films deposited a t sputter pressure s higher than 0.53 Pa, an additional weak 

Pt(020) reflection appears at 2 θ ≈ 46.35°. The β-Ta(002) diffraction peak at 2 θ ≈ 33.4° (space 

group: P -421m) [ 58] confirms the presence of the Ta adhesion layer , while a faint diffr action from 

the single -crystalline Si substrate is visible in the 2D images (2 θ ≈ 70.5 °). The β-Ta and Si signals 

are not resolved in the corresponding 1D diffraction patterns due to their low intensity (Figure S2 ). 

Representative 2D diffraction images for p1, p8, and p25 reveal qualitative differences in grain 

orientation and texture. At low sputter pressure (p1), the Pt(111) reflection appears as a discrete 

segment of a diffraction arc, indicating strongly textur ed growth. At intermediate pressure (p8), 

the Pt(111) arc becomes slightly broader, consistent with an increased angular distribution of grain 

orientations while maintaining a dominant texture component. For p25, a visible diffraction ring 

appears together with a brighter Pt(111) intensity segment within the ring , reflecting a mixed 

growth regime where partially polycrystalline grains coexist with textured grains. 

The evolution of the Pt(111) peak position with sputter pressure reflects changes in the out -of -

plane lattice strain induced by biaxial residual stress. In -plane tensile stress leads to an out -of -

plane lattice contraction , leading to a shift of the diffraction peak toward higher 2 θ values, whereas 

compressive stress produces the opposite effect. In the present thin films, the Pt(111) reflection 

progressively shifts to higher 2 θ values with increasing sputter pressure up to 1.07 Pa (p8), 

indicating a gradual out -of -plane lattice contraction relative to stress -free bulk Pt [ 39] (Figure 3 b). 

The first two samples exhibit compressive in -plane strain according to the DHM curvature 

measurements , which corresponds to an out -of -plane lattice expansion due to the Poisson effect 19 

and hence peak positions at lower 2 θ values. At higher sputter pressures, the peak position shifts 

slightly back toward lower 2 θ values (p25), indicating a partial stress relaxation, in good 

agreement with the stress evolution obtained from curvature measurements. 

Figure 3. (a) XRD patterns of Pt thin films deposited at different sputter pressures shown as a 

stacked intensity plot to illustrate the evolution of diffraction features with sputter pressure. ( b)

Average out -of -plane elastic strain ε⊥ of the Pt thin films in dependence of sputter pressure derived 

from the Pt(111) peak position .

Since electrocatalytic reactions occur at the surface, nanoscale structural variations may influence 

electro catalytic activity. However, techniques such as XRD and DHM provide only spatially 

averaged information on lattice parameters and residual stress , respectively . To further examine 

lattice parameters at the local scale, cross -sectional TEM combined with SAED analysis was 

performed . Figure 4 shows a pressure -dependent transition in the Pt thin -film morphology. While 

films deposited at lower pressure exhibit a comparatively compact columnar structure, increasing 

the sputter pressure leads to a more open morphology with pronounced intercolumnar gaps. These 

gaps rarely extend to the substra te, suggesting that a dense basic layer forms during the initial stage 

of growth before column separation and stress relaxation become dominant. The thickness of this 

dense layer appears to decrease with increasing sputter pressure. The sample p25 additionally 

> a)
> (111)
> (222)
> (020)
> 0.13
> 0.27
> 0.53
> 0.80
> 0.93
> 1.07
> 1.33
> 1.60
> 0.67
> 2.67
> 3.33
> b)

20 

differs in total thickness , being 40% thinner (about 40 nm compared to about 60 nm ). The thickness 

of the Pt thin film and its grain size resulted in a relatively small number of diffraction spots on 

corresponding SAED patterns. To ensure best possible analysis, each diffraction pattern was 

rotationally averaged and the interplanar distances were calculated from the corresponding radial 

intensity profiles using the Digital Micrograph DIFFPack software tool [5 9]. From each measured 

interplanar distance, the lattice parameter was calculated, and averaged values are presented in the 

Supporting Information (Table S1) and Figure 5. 

The lattice parameters obtained from cross -sectional samples are consistently larger than the bulk 

Pt reference value of 0.39237(3) nm [39] for all investigated sample s, indicating an out -of -plane 

lattice expansion . The average lattice parameter decreases from 0.39 5 nm for the Pt films deposited 

at low sputter pressures (0.13 –0.27 Pa) , to 0.394 nm for intermediate pressures (0.93 –1.60 Pa ), 

and further to 0.393 nm at higher pressure (3.33 Pa) . Considering an experimental uncertainty of 

±0.002 nm, this trend indicates a gradual reduction of the out -of -plane lattice expansion with 

increasing sputter pressure . In contrast to the macroscopic residual stress measured by DHM, 

which exhibits a non -monotonic dependence on sputter pressure , the lattice strain derived from 

SA ED evolves approximately monotonically within experimental uncertainty. While DHM 

captures the global mechanical response of the film -substrate system, including stress buildup and 

partial relaxation, SAED selectively probes the local lattice parameter within nanoscale regions of 

individual grains. Thus, SAED provides complementary insight into nanoscale lattice strain 

accommodation at the local crystallographic level, despite the decreasing magnitude of the 

measured out -of -plane strain at higher deposition pressures. While partial stress relaxation during 

lamella FIB preparation cannot be excluded, the measured lattice parameters remain well suited 

for assessing relative trends of local strain s between the samples .21 

Figure 4. TEM assessment of the Pt thin films microstructure and analysis of selected area 

diffraction patterns ( ND – not detected ). Patterns were acquired using the smallest available 22 

selected area diffraction aperture (SAA) , highlighted in figure a). The right column of the figure 

shows rotationally averaged patterns with measured interplanar distances for the following planes 

of the Pt crystal: (111), (200), (220), (311), and (222). 

Figure 5. Correlation of a verage lattice parameters and sputter pressure, with a linear fit. 

Correlation between strain and HER Activity 

Representative CVs recorded at a scan rate of 150 mVs ⁻¹ are shown in Figure 6a. All CVs exhibit 

characteristic voltam metric features associated with hydrogen adsorption and desorption on Pt 

surfaces in the potential range of 0.05 - 0.35 V vs . RHE. With increasing residual stress , two 

desorption peaks at approximately 0.13 and 0.24 V vs . RHE become more pronounced. These 

features, labeled as D1 and D2, have previously been associated with surface roughening effects 

on Pt electrodes [60 -62 ]. Specifically, D1 is attributed to Pt(100) -type step sites, while D2 is 

associated with Pt(111) -type step sites. Surfaces dominated by extended Pt(111) terraces typically 

show a diminished or absent desorption feature. This observation is consistent with the XRD 

results, which indicate a stronger (111) texture for films deposited at lower spu tter pressure. The 

ECSA, estimated from the hydrogen adsorption region, is shown in Figure 6b . For films deposited 

at sputter pressures between 0.13 and 0.93 Pa, the ECSA remains close t o the geometric area of 23 

the SDC tip (0.002 cm 2). At higher pressures (1.07 - 3.3 Pa), the ECSA increases by approximately 

a factor of three to four. This trend is consistent with AFM analysis, which reveals a threefold 

increase in surface roughness for pressures above ~ 1.5 Pa. 

Figure 6 (a) Cyclic voltammograms of selected Pt thin films illustrating the dependence on 

hydrogen adsorption and desorption features with sputter pressure. (b) ECSA and AFM roughness 

parameters in dependence of sputter pressure. 

To enable comparison of the HER electro catalytic activity of the different Pt thin films, the 

recorded currents during LSVs were normalized to the ECSA. Figure 7 presents potential vs . RHE 

at a current density of -10 mA/cm 2 in dependence of residual strain. The data reveal that the HER 

activity increases as the residual strain shifts from tensile towards compressive values. The thin 

film deposited at the lowest pressure ( 0.13 Pa, p1) exhibits the highest HER activity. This film is 

characterized by compressive strain, pronounced (111) texture, and relatively smooth surface 

morphology . It has a residual strain of -0.034% and requires a potential vs . RHE of -11.3 mV to 

reach -10 mA/cm ². With increasing sp utter pressure, the HER activity decreases, reaching -26.1 

mV at -10 mA/cm ² for 1.07 Pa ( p8 ), while the residual strain becomes increasingly compressive 24 

up to 0. 119 %. Thin f ilms deposited at even higher pressures however show substantially lower 

HER activity , down to -48.8 mV vs . RHE at -10 mA/cm ² for 3.33 Pa ( p25 ), despite a reduction in 

tensile strain (0.0 49 %) and a significant increas e in ECSA. This apparent discrepancy indicates 

that HER activity cannot be rationalized by residual strain alone. While the ECSA remains 

approximately constant for samples sputtered at lower pressures, it increases substantially at higher 

pressures , primarily attributed to e nhanced surface roughness , resulting in a corresponding 

decrease in ECSA -normalized activity . These observations demonstrate that sputter pressure 

simultaneously modifies residual strain and microstructure , particularly surface morphology, 

leading to a coupled effect that results in the measured HER activity of sputtered thin films . In 

particular , microstructural factors such as the exposure of less active surface facets and reduced 

intercolumnar connectivity are likely to contribute to the observed decrease in electro catalytic 

activity . Overall, these results indicate that the governing factors for HER activity can be 

controlled by the sputter pressure . At lower pressures, where ECSA and surface roughn ess remain 

approximately constant, variations in activity can be primarily attributed to residual strain. In 

contrast, at higher pressures, microstructural changes and increased surface roughness dominate 

the catalytic response. This behavior reflects the multiscale nature of strain in the thin film . While 

XRD and DHM measurements reveal a non -monotonic, volcano -type change of the macroscopic 

residual strain - with a tensile maximum at intermediate sputter pressure followed by partial 

relaxation at higher pressures - SAED shows a continuous decrease in lattice spacing, 

corresponding to increasing tensile strain at the nanoscale across the entire sputter pressure range. 

The monotonic nanoscale strain trend revealed by SAED is more consistent with the overall 

decrease in HER activity than the macroscopic residual strain change , highlighting that the 

catalytic response is governed by local, surface -sensitive properties . At higher sputter pressures, 25 

this nanoscale strain evolution is accompanied with pronounced microstructural changes, 

indicating that the catalytic response in this regime results from the combined influence of 

nanoscale strain and microstructural changes. 

Figure 7. HER potential vs . RHE at −10 mA /cm ² plotted against residual strain. Currents were 

normalized to the corresponding ECSA. Error bars represent the standard deviation from repeated 

LSV measurements at different positions of each sample . Positive strain values correspond to 

tensile strain, while negative values indicate compressive strain. 

Computational analysis of strain -dependent hydrogen adsorption 

Thermodynamics and electrochemical studies indicate that H upd on Pt(111) occupies the 3 -fold 

hollow sites [ 63,6 4]. While our calculations yield slightly more negative adsorption energies at top 

sites, the difference relative to fcc hollow sites is small, on the order of 0.06 eV. Based on 26 

experimental observations and to ensure consistency across surfaces, hydrogen adsorption is 

therefore described at threefold hollow fcc sites throughout this work, in line with previous studies 

on Pt -like metals [6 5, 66]. For unstrained Pt(111), Δ𝐺 ? of -0.032 eV was obtained, in good 

agreement with reported literature values [6 7]. Strain is known to modify adsorption energies by 

altering metal -metal and metal -adsorbate interactions. By systematically tuning the in -plane lattice 

constants, tensile and compressive strain provide a controlled means to investigate how deviations 

from the equilibrium lattice spacing affect hydrogen adsorption and, consequently, HER activity. 

As demonstrated by Peterson et al. [6 8], the effect of strain on adsorption energi es can be 

understood in terms of the mechanical response of surface sites to lattice deformation. Within this 

framework, tensile and compressive strain modify the local atomic environment of the adsorption 

sites, thereby systematically shifting the adsorption energies. Under tensile strain, adsorption 

becomes stronger, with adsorption energies of -0.056 eV at 0.5% strain and -0.059 eV at 1% strain. 

In contrast, compressive stra in weakens adsorption, yielding -0.025 eV at 0.5% strain and -0.007 

eV at 1% stra in. Overall, across the investigated strain range from 1% tensile to 1% compressive 

strain, hydrogen adsorption energies span from −0.059 eV to −0.007 eV. Beyond these adsorption 

trends, HER polarization curves further illustrate the electro catalytic response of thin films . The 

experimental polarization curves shown in Figure 8a form the basis for the strain -dependent 

analysis, from which the characteristic potentials are extracted. The curves are ordered by sputter 

pressure , with the corresponding residual strain values indicated , reflecting the coupled influence 

of strain and microstructure on the catalytic activity. To isolate the effect of strain, complementary 

calculated polarization curves (using eq. 4) are presented in Figure 8b. 27 

Figure 8. (a) Experimental HER polarization curves (LSVs) for Pt thin films deposited at different 

sputter pressures , corresponding to different residual strain states , showing the current density as 

a function of potential vs . RHE. Current densities were normalized to the ECSA. (b) Theoretical 

HER polarization curves for Pt(111) surface under tensile and compressive strain . Compressive 

strai n is indicated according to the sign convention used in the experimental data (negative: 

compressive; positive: tensile). 

The experimental polarization curves reveal a systematic decrease in HER activity with increasing 

sputter pressure, highlighting the transition from a strain -dominated regime at lower pressures to 

a microstructure -dominated regime at higher pressures. In contrast, the theoretical results isolate 

the effect of strain on hydrogen adsorption , which can be rationalized in terms of hydrogen 

adsorption strength. Compressive strain shifts the adsorption energy closer to the optimal value 

(ΔGH ≈ 0), enhancing HER a ctivity, whereas tensile strain strengthens hydrogen binding and 

moves the system away from the Sabatier optimum. The corresponding theoretical polarization 

curves in Figure 8b capture the same qualitative behavior, showing strain -dependent shifts in HER 

activity. Consistent with the DFT results, compressive strain weakens hydrogen binding, while 28 

tensile strain drives the system into the strong -binding regime. The qualitative agreement between 

experimental and theoretical trends indicates that strain -dependent changes in adsorption energies 

captured by DFT contribute to the observed electrocatalytic response. Notably, at higher tensile 

strain, the DFT results indicate a tendency towards a plateau in HER activity, suggesting that 

further increase in tensile strain do es not significantly alter the adsorption energ ies . A similar 

tendency cannot be unam biguously identified in the experimental data, as the observed decrease 

in activity at higher tensile strain is likely dominated by concurrent microstructural changes, 

making it challenging to distinguish a potential plateau in the strain -dependent contrib ution. To 

further elucidate this behavior, adsorption energies were calculated as a function of hydrogen 

coverage by consecutively adding hydrogen atoms to the lowest -energy structural configuration 

up to full coverage . The differential adsorption free ene rgy for the addition of the 𝑛 -th hydrogen 

atom was calculated as Δ𝐺 D = 𝐺 D − 𝐺 D&% − 1 2W 𝐺 (𝐻 #), where 𝐺 D represents the free energy of 

the surface with 𝑛 adsorbed hydrogen atoms. The integrated free energy is obtained as G⁰ = Σₙ

ΔGₙ, representing the cumulative free adsorption energy from zero up to full hydrogen coverage. 

This procedure yields a discrete set of integral adsorption free energies as a function of hydrogen 

coverage. To obtain a continuous representation of the free -energy landscape, these data were 

fitted using a quadratic function , such that :

𝐺 1(𝜃 ) = 𝛼 𝜃 # + 𝛽𝜃 (5) 

Here, the surface coverage is defined as 𝜃 = 𝑛 /𝑁 "+)-" , where 𝑁 "+)-" = 9. The parameter 𝛽 

corresponds to the adsorption free energy at zero coverage, as defined in equation 3, and 𝛼 

quantifies adsorbate –adsorbate interactions. The linear term describes the intrinsic adsorption 

energy, while the quadratic term captures coverage -dependent interactions between adsorbed 29 

hydrogen atoms. The resulting free -energy profiles for Pt(111) under tensile and compressive 

strain are shown in Figure 9a. 

Figure 9. a) Quadratic fit of the coverage -dependent hydrogen adsorption free energy, G ⁰(θ)

(equation 5) , on unstrained and strained Pt(111) under tensile and compressive strain. b) 

Corresponding Frumkin isotherms of hydrogen coverage θ as a function of total free energy ΔG

(equation 6) .

As shown in Figure 9a, the free energy profile depends on the applied strain. The quadratic 

coefficient α increases progressively from 0.921 eV for Pt(111) to 0.982 eV and 1.030 eV under 

0.5% and 1% compressive strain, respectively, indicating enhanced repulsive lateral H –H

interactions on the contracted surface. The linear coefficient β also shifts systematically from -

0.532 eV to -0.452 eV and -0.345 eV , reflecting a progressive weakening of hydrogen adsorption. 

The opposite trend is observed under tensile strain, where β becomes more negative, shifting to -

0.674 eV and -0.732 eV , and α reduces to 0.914 eV and 0.844 eV at 0.5% and 1%, respectively, 

consistent with stronger hydrogen binding and more negative adsorption free energies. The strain -30 

dependent G ⁰(θ) profiles modulate hydrogen surface coverage, with tensile strain promoting 

higher hydrogen surface coverages, consistent with stronger adsorption, while compressive strain 

reduces coverage and facilitates hydrogen desorption. Although strai n induces small variations in 

ΔGH, which confine all surfaces close to zero, compressive strain shifts Pt(111) toward ΔGH = 0. 

Th is behavior is reflected in the voltammetr ic response, as the free energy landscape G⁰(θ) governs 

the evolution of hydrogen cov erage with applied potential . Strain -induced perturbations in G ⁰(θ)

therefore are captured in the D1 and D2 desorption features. Tensile strain stabilizes adsorbed 

hydrogen, leading to increased surface coverage and enhanced peak intensities, whereas 

compressive strain suppresses hydrogen accumulation and diminishes the corresponding 

voltammetric features. To quantify how strain influences the coverage behavior , the differential 

adsorption free energy was obtained by differentiating the fitted expression in eq . 5 with respect 

to the hydrogen coverage 𝜃 . Including configurational entropy contributions results to a Frumkin -

type adsorption isotherm description the equilibrium hydrogen coverage , where the total free 

energy can be written as 

∆𝐺 = 𝑑 𝐺 1

𝑑𝜃 + 𝑘 E𝑇 ln ` 𝜃 

1 − 𝜃 a (6) 

The corresponding coverage –free -energy relations obtained from eq . 6 are shown in Figure 9b. 

The adsorption isotherms exhibit a clear strain dependence. Tensile strain shifts the curves toward 

more negative ΔG values, indicating stronger hydrogen adsorption, whereas compressive strain 

shifts them toward higher ΔG values, consistent with weaker adsorption. In addition, tensile strain 

leads to a gradual increase in hydrogen coverage over a wider range of free energies, while 

compressive strain results in a steeper transition from low to high coverage. This behavior is 31 

consistent with the free -energy profiles shown in Figure 9a, where tensile strain results in a broader 

minimum and compressive strain in a steeper profile. 

CONCLUSION S

We demonstrate that sputter pressure can be effectively used to tune the residual strain and 

microstructure of Pt thin films, thereby influencing their HER activity. Residual strain evolves 

non -monotonically with pressure, consistent with intrinsic stress development during sputter 

deposition, while increasing pressure simultaneously induces rougher and columnar morphologies. 

Strain is present across multiple length sc ales, comprising both film -averaged residual strain and 

local lattice distortions. While m acroscopic measurements reveal a non -monotonic strain evolution 

with partial saturation, SAED shows a continuous change in lattice spacing at the nanoscale with 

increasing pressure. HER activity does not follow the macroscopic strain trend but instead 

decr eases at higher sputter pressures. At low pressures, where microstructural variations are 

limited, activity variations correlate with strain. With increasing pressure, however, morphological 

changes together with continuously evolving nanoscale lattice dis tortions coincide with a decline 

in activity, indicating a transition from a strain -correlated regime to one governed by the combined 

influence of local strain and microstructural changes. DFT calculations provide a mechanistic 

framework linking strain to hydrogen adsorption energetics, explicitly accounting for coverage 

and adsorbate –adsorbate interactions. Stra in systematically shifts adsorption energies and alters 

the coverage -dependent free -energy landscape . Compressive strain progressively weakens 

hydr ogen binding, shifting ΔGH toward zero, while tensile strain strengthens adsorption and drives 

ΔGH to more negative values. Despite these variations remaining within a comparable free energy 

range, the strain -induced changes in G⁰(θ) govern the hydrogen surface coverage, with 32 

compressive strain facilitating desorption and tensile strain promoting hydrogen accumulation, 

trends that suggest compressive strain may provide a more favorable condition for catalytic 

hydrogen turnover. 

Overall, HER activity in sputter -deposited Pt thin films arises from the coupled influence of strain 

across multiple length scales and pressure -induced microstructural evolution. The observed 

pressure dependence reflects the interplay of these effects, wit h strain contributions most evident 

when structural variations are limited and progressively obscured at higher sputter pressures. These 

findings establish strain as a key parameter in thin -film electrocatalysis and highlight that its 

impact can only be un derstood in the context of the evolving microstructure. 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT 

Supporting Information . The Supporting Information is available free of charge . Additional 

data are available 10.5281/zenodo.19705685 

AUTHOR INFORMATION 

Corresponding Author 

*Alfred Ludwig – Ruhr -University Bochum , Universitätsstr. 150, 44780 Bochum, Germany; 

https://orcid.org/0000 -0003 -2802 -6774 ; Email: alfred.ludwig@rub.de . *Corina Andronescu –

University Duisburg -Essen, Universitätsstraße 7, 45141 Essen; https://orcid.org/0000 -0002 -

1227 -1209 ; E -Mail: corina.andronescu@uni -due.de .

Present Addresses 

†Electrochemistry for Energy Storage, Max -Planck -Institut für Chemische Energiekonversion .33 

Author Contributions 

The manuscript was written throug h contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval 

to the final version of the manuscript. 

Sabrina Baha : Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Data 

Curation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing, Visualization; Alejandro E. 

Perez Mendoza : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation , Visualization , Validation, 

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing ; Leonardo Morais : Formal analysis ,

Visualization , Investigation, Validation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing ;

Aleksander Kostka : Investigation, Conceptualization , Visualization , Writing - Original Draft ,

Writing - Review & Editing ; Shivam Shukla : Investigation ; Ellen Suhr : Investigation , Writing 

- Review & Editing ; Andre Oliveira : Conceptualization, Investigation , Writing - Review & 

Editing ; Anika Gatzki : Conceptualization, Investigation ; Henrik H. Kristoffersen : Writing -

Review & Editing ; Jan Rossmei sl : Methodology ; Corina Andronescu : Conceptualization, 

Methodology, Validation, Writing - Review & Editing ; Alfred Ludwig : Conceptualization, 

Methodology, Validation, Writing - Review & Editing .

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors acknowledge financial support by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche 

Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG) in the framework of the DFG project LU1175/31 -1, project AN 

1570/2 -1 (440951282) and Project -ID 506711657 – SFB 1625, subproject A01 and C02 . The ZGH 

at the Ruhr University Bochum is acknowledged for the use of its equipment (TEM, FIB and 

XRD). 34 

REFERENCES 

(1) Hansen, J. N.; Prats, H.; Toudahl, K. K.; Secher, N. M.; Chan, K.; Kibsgaard, J.; 

Chorkendorff, I. Is There Anything Better than Pt for HER? ACS Energy Letters 2021 , 6 (4), 

1175 –1180. DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.1c00246 

(2) Zhong, Z.; Tu, Y.; Zhang, L.; Ke, J.; Zhong, C.; Tan, W.; Wang, L.; Zhang, J.; Song, H.; Du, 

L.; Cui, Z. Surface strain effect on electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction of PT -Based 

intermetallics. ACS Catalysis 2024 , 14 (5), 2917 –2923. DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.3c06291 

(3) Markovic, N. M.; Gasteiger, H. A.; Ross, P. N. Oxygen Reduction on Platinum Low -Index 

Single -Crystal Surfaces in Sulfuric Acid Solution: Rotating Ring -Pt(hkl) Disk Studies. The 

Journal of Physical Chemistry 1995 , 99 (11), 3411 –3415. DOI: 10.1021/j100011a001 

(4) Nørskov, J. K.; Rossmeisl, J.; Logadottir, A.; Lindqvist, L.; Kitchin, J. R.; Bligaard, T.; 

Jónsson, H. Origin of the overpotential for oxygen reduction at a Fuel -Cell Cathode. The Journal 

of Physical Chemistry B 2004 , 108 (46), 17886 –17892. DOI: 10.1021/jp047349j 

(5) Nørskov, J. K.; Bligaard, T.; Logadottir, A.; Kitchin, J. R.; Chen, J. G.; Pandelov, S.; 

Stimming, U. Trends in the exchange current for hydrogen evolution. Journal of the 

Electrochemical Society 2005 , 152 (3), J23. DOI: 10.1149/1.1856988 

(6) Löffler, T.; Ludwig, A.; Rossmeisl, J.; Schuhmann, W. What makes High -Entropy Alloys 

exceptional electrocatalysts? Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2021 , 60 (52), 26894 –

26903 . DOI: 10.1002/anie.202109212 

(7) Calle -Vallejo, F.; Tymoczko , J.; Colic, V.; Vu, Q. H.; Pohl, M. D.; Morgenstern, K.; 

Loffreda, D.; Sautet, P.; Schuhmann, W.; Bandarenka, A. S. Finding optimal surface sites on 

heterogeneous catalysts by counting nearest neighbors. Science 2015 , 350 (6257), 185 –189. 

DOI: 10.1126/science.aab3501 

(8) Deng, Q.; Huang, R.; Shao, L. -H.; Mumyatov, A. V.; Troshin, P. A.; An, C.; Wu, S.; Gao, L.; 

Yang, B.; Hu, N. Atomic understanding of the strain -induced electrocatalysis from DFT 

calculation: progress and perspective. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2023 , 25 (18), 

12565 –12586. DOI: 10.1039/d3cp01077e 35 

(9) Zhao, J.; Wang, M.; Peng, Y.; Ni, J.; Hu, S.; Zeng, J.; Chen, Q. Exploring the Strain Effect in 

Single Particle Electrochemistry using Pd Nanocrystals. Angewandte Chemie 2023 , 135 (30). 

DOI: 10.1002/ange.202304424 

(10) Xia, Z.; Guo, S. Strain engineering of metal -based nanomaterials for energy electrocatalysis. 

Chemical Society Reviews 2019 , 48 (12), 3265 –3278. DOI: 10.1039/c8cs00846a .

(11) Mao, X.; Qin, Z.; Ge, S.; Rong, C.; Zhang, B.; Xuan, F. Strain engineering of 

electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction. Materials Horizons 2022 , 10 (2), 340 –360. 

DOI: 10.1039/d2mh01171a 

(12) Benson, E. E.; Ha, M. -A.; Gregg, Brian. A.; Van De Lagemaat, J.; Neale, N. R.; Svedruzic, 

D. Dynamic tuning of a thin film electrocatalyst by tensile strain. Scientific Reports 2019 , 9 (1), 

15906. DOI: 10.1038/s41598 -019 -52245 -y

(13) Du, M.; Cui, L.; Cao, Y.; Bard, A. J. Mechanoelectrochemical catalysis of the effect of 

elastic strain on a platinum nanofilm for the ORR exerted by a shape memory alloy substrate. 

Journal of the American Chemical Society 2015 , 137 (23), 7397 –7403. DOI: 

10.1021/jacs.5b03034 

(14) Jiao, L.; Liu, E.; Hwang, S.; Mukerjee, S.; Jia, Q. Compressive strain reduces the hydrogen 

evolution and oxidation reaction activity of platinum in alkaline solution. ACS Catalysis 2021 ,

11 (13), 8165 –8173. DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.1c01723 

(15) Strasser, P.; Koh, S.; Anniyev, T.; Greeley, J.; More, K.; Yu, C.; Liu, Z.; Kaya, S.; 

Nordlund, D.; Ogasawara, H.; Toney, M. F.; Nilsson, A. Lattice -strain control of the activity in 

dealloyed core –shell fuel cell catalysts. Nature Chemistry 2010 , 2 (6), 454 –460. DOI: 

10.1038/nchem.623 

(16 ) Bu, L.; Zhang, N.; Guo, S.; Zhang, X.; Li, J.; Yao, J.; Wu, T.; Lu, G.; Ma, J. -Y.; Su, D.; 

Huang, X. Biaxially strained PtPb/Pt core/shell nanoplate boosts oxygen reduction catalysis. 

Science 2016 , 354 (6318), 1410 –1414 . DOI: 10.1126/science.aah6133 36 

(17) Wang, X.; Zheng, Y.; Sheng, W.; Xu, Z. J.; Jaroniec, M.; Qiao, S. -Z. Strategies for design 

of electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution under alkaline conditions. Materials Today 2020 , 36 ,

125 –138. DOI: 10.1016/j.mattod.2019.12.003 

(18) Sethuraman, V. A.; Vairavapandian, D.; Lafouresse, M. C.; Maark, T. A.; Karan, N.; Sun, 

S.; Bertocci, U.; Peterson, A. A.; Stafford, G. R.; Guduru, P. R. Role of elastic strain on 

electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction reaction on Pt. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2015 ,

119 (33), 19042 –19052. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b06096 

(19) He, T.; Wang, W.; Shi, F.; Yang, X.; Li, X.; Wu, J.; Yin, Y.; Jin, M. Mastering the surface 

strain of platinum catalysts for efficient electrocatalysis. Nature 2021 , 598 (7879), 76 –81. DOI: 

10.1038/s41586 -021 -03870 -z

(20) Nørskov, J. K.; Bligaard, T.; Logadottir , A.; Kitchin, J. R.; Chen, J. G.; Pandelov, S.; 

Stimming, U. Trends in the exchange current for hydrogen evolution. Journal of the 

Electrochemical Society 2005 , 152 (3), J23. DOI: 10.1149/1.1856988 

(21) Greeley, J.; Jaramillo, T. F.; Bonde, J.; Chorkendorff, I.; Nørskov, J. K. Computational high -

throughput screening of electrocatalytic materials for hydrogen evolution. Nature Materials 2006 ,

5 (11), 909 –913. DOI: 10.1038/nmat1752 

(22) Liu, J.; Hagopian, A.; McCrum, I. T.; Doblhoff -Dier, K.; Koper, M. T. M. Unraveling the 

Origin of the Repulsive Interaction between Hydrogen Adsorbates on Platinum Single -Crystal 

Electrodes. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2024 , 128 (36), 15019 –15028. DOI: 

10.1021/acs.jpcc.4c05193 

(23) Østergaard, F. C.; Bagger, A.; Rossmeisl, J. Predicting catalytic activity in hydrogen evolution 

reaction. Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 2022 , 35 , 101037. DOI: 

10.1016/j.coelec.2022.101037 

(2 4) Mavrikakis, M.; Hammer, B.; Nørskov, J. K. Effect of strain on the reactivity of metal 

surfaces. Physical Review Letters 1998 , 81 (13), 2819 –2822. DOI: 10.1103/physrevlett.81.2819 37 

(2 5) Martínez -Alonso, C.; Guevara -Vela, J. M.; LLorca, J. The effect of elastic strains on the 

adsorption energy of H, O, and OH in transition metals. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 

2021 , 23 (37), 21295 –21306. DOI: 10.1039/d1cp03312c 

(2 6) Shen, Y. G.; Mai, Y. W.; Zhang, Q. C.; McKenzie, D. R.; McFall, W. D.; McBride, W. E. 

Residual stress, microstructure, and structure of tungsten thin films deposited by magnetron 

sputtering. Journal of Applied Physics 2000 , 87 (1), 177 –187 . DOI: 10.1063/1.371841 

(2 7) Davis, C. A. A simple model for the formation of compressive stress in thin films by ion 

bombardment. Thin Solid Films 1993 , 226 (1), 30 –34 . DOI: 10.1016/0040 -6090(93)90201 -y

(2 8) Thornton, J. A. Influence of apparatus geometry and deposition conditions on the structure 

and topography of thick sputtered coatings. Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology 1974 , 11 

(4), 666 –670 . DOI: 10.1116/1.1312732 

(2 9) Müller, K. -H. Stress and microstructure of sputter -deposited thin films: Molecular dynamics 

investigations. Journal of Applied Physics 1987 , 62 (5), 1796 –1799. DOI: 10.1063/1.339559 

(30 ) Slavcheva, E.; Ganske, G.; Topalov, G.; Mokwa, W.; Schnakenberg, U. Effect of sputtering 

parameters on surface morphology and catalytic efficiency of thin platinum films. Applied 

Surface Science 2009 , 255 (13 –14), 6479 –6486. DOI: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2009.02.033 

(31) Grochla, D.; Banko, L.; Pfetzing -Micklich, J.; Behm, H.; Dahlmann, R.; Ludwig, A. Si 

micro -cantilever sensor chips for space -resolved stress measurements in physical and plasma -

enhanced chemical vapour deposition. Sensors and Actuators a Physical 2017 , 270 , 271 –277. 

DOI: 10.1016/j.sna.2017.12.050 

(3 2) Stoney, G. G. The tension of metallic films deposited by electrolysis. Proceedings of the 

Royal Society of London Series a Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character 

1909 , 82 (553), 172 –175. DOI: 10.1098/rspa.1909.0021 

(3 3) Freund, L. B.; Suresh, S. Stress in Anisotropic and Patterned Films. In Thin Film Materials: 

Stress, Defect Formation and Surface Evolution ; Cambridge University Press , 2004; pp 171 –

186. 38 

(3 4) Macfarlane, R. E.; Rayne, J. A.; Jones, C. K. Anomalous temperature dependence of shear 

modulus c44 for platinum. Physics Letters 1965 , 18 (2), 91 –92. DOI: 10.1016/0031 -

9163(65)90659 -1

(35 ) Greene, J. E. Thin film nucleation, growth, and microstructural evolution. Handbook of 

Deposition Technologies for Films and Coatings , 3rd ed.; William Andrew Publishing; 20 10 ; pp 

554 –620. DOI: 10.1016/b978 -0-8155 -2031 -3.00012 -0

(37 ) Doerner, M. F.; Nix, W. D. Stresses and deformation processes in thin films on substrates. 

Critical Reviews in Solid State and Materials Sciences 1988 , 14 (3), 225 –268. DOI: 

10.1080/10408438808243734 

(3 8) Motomura, T.; Takemura, K.; Nagase, T.; Morita, N.; Tabaru , T. Suppression of substrate 

temperature in DC magnetron sputtering deposition by magnetic mirror -type magnetron cathode. 

AIP Advances 2023 , 13 (2). DOI: 10.1063/5.0138840 

(39) Owen, E. A.; Yates, E. L. XLI.Precision measurements of crystal parameters. The London 

Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 1933 , 15 (98), 472 –488. 

DOI: 10.1080/14786443309462199 

(40 ) Biegler, T.; Rand, D. A. J.; Woods, R. Limiting oxygen coverage on platinized platinum; 

Relevance to determination of real platinum area by hydrogen adsorption. Journal of 

Electroanalytical Chemistry 1971 , 29 (2), 269 –277. DOI: 10.1016/s0022 -0728(71)80089 -x

(41 ) Hammer, B.; Hansen, L. B.; Nørskov, J. K. Improved adsorption energetics within density -

functional theory using revised Perdew -Burke -Ernzerhof functionals. Physical Review. B, 

Condensed Matter 1999 , 59 (11), 7413 –7421. DOI: 10.1103/physrevb.59.7413 

(42 ) Mortensen, J. J.; Larsen, A. H.; Kuisma, M.; Ivanov, A. V.; Taghizadeh, A.; Peterson, A.; 

Haldar, A.; Dohn, A. O.; Schäfer, C.; Jónsson, E. Ö.; Hermes, E. D.; Nilsson, F. A.; Kastlunger, 

G.; Levi, G.; Jónsson, H.; Häkkinen, H.; Fojt, J.; Kangsabanik, J.; S ødequist, J.; Lehtomäki, J.; 

Heske, J.; Enkovaara, J.; Winther, K. T.; Dulak, M.; Melander, M. M.; Ovesen, M.; Louhivuori, 

M.; Walter, M.; Gjerding, M.; Lopez -Acevedo, O.; Erhart, P.; Warmbier, R.; Würdemann, R.; 

Kaappa, S.; Latini, S.; Boland, T. M.; Blig aard, T.; Skovhus, T.; Susi, T.; Maxson, T.; Rossi, T.; 39 

Chen, X.; Schmerwitz, Y. L. A.; Schiøtz, J.; Olsen, T.; Jacobsen, K. W.; Thygesen, K. S. 

GPAW: An open Python package for electronic structure calculations. The Journal of Chemical 

Physics 2024 , 160 (9). DOI: 10.1063/5.0182685 

(43 ) Larsen, A. H.; Mortensen, J. J.; Blomqvist, J.; Castelli, I. E.; Christensen, R.; Du łak, M.; 

Friis, J.; Groves, M. N.; Hammer, B.; Hargus, C.; Hermes, E. D.; Jennings, P. C.; Jensen, P. B.; 

Kermode, J.; Kitchin, J. R.; Kolsbjerg, E. L.; Kubal, J.; Kaasbjer g, K.; Lysgaard, S.; Maronsson, 

J. B.; Maxson, T.; Olsen, T.; Pastewka, L.; Peterson, A.; Rostgaard, C.; Schiøtz, J.; Schütt, O.; 

Strange, M.; Thygesen, K. S.; Vegge, T.; Vilhelmsen, L.; Walter, M.; Zeng, Z.; Jacobsen, K. W. 

The atomic simulation envi ronment —a Python library for working with atoms. Journal of 

Physics Condensed Matter 2017 , 29 (27), 273002. DOI: 10.1088/1361 -648x/aa680e 

(44) Atkins, P. W.; De Paula, J. Atkins’ physical chemistry ; Oxford University Press, 2014. 

(45) Ozório, M. S.; Nygaard, M. F.; Petersen, A. S.; Behm, R. J.; Rossmeisl, J. Self -induced 

long -range surface strain improves oxygen reduction reaction. Journal of Catalysis 2024 , 433 ,

115484. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcat.2024.115484 

(4 6) Liu, M.; Gautam, D.; Clausen, C. M.; Tirmidzi, A.; Wiberg, G. K. H.; Rossmeisl, J.; Arenz, 

M. Electrochemical synthesis of high entropy nanoparticles and the exploration of the Pd –Ag –

Au composition space for the oxygen reduction reaction. Faraday Discussions 2025 , 264 (0), 

344 –357 . DOI: 10.1039/d5fd00095e 

(4 7) Mints, V. A.; Svane, K. L.; Rossmeisl, J.; Arenz, M. Exploring the High -Entropy Oxide 

Composition Space: Insights through Comparing Experimental with Theoretical Models for the 

Oxygen Evolution Reaction. ACS Catalysis 2024 , 14 (9), 6936 –6944. DOI: 

10.1021/acscatal.3c05915. 

(4 8) Pletea, M.; Brückner, W.; Wendrock, H.; Kaltofen, R. Stress evolution during and after 

sputter deposition of Cu thin films onto Si (100) substrates under various sputtering pressures. 

Journal of Applied Physics 2005 , 97 (5). DOI: 10.1063/1.1858062 40 

(4 9) Hoffman, D. W.; Thornton, J. A. Internal stresses in Cr, Mo, Ta, and Pt films deposited by 

sputtering from a planar magnetron source. Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology 1982 , 20 

(3), 355 –358. DOI: 10.1116/1.571463 

(50 ) Windischmann, H. Intrinsic stress in sputter -deposited thin films. Critical Reviews in Solid 

State and Materials Sciences 1992 , 17 (6), 547 –596. DOI: 10.1080/10408439208244586 

(51 ) Davis, C. A. A simple model for the formation of compressive stress in thin films by ion 

bombardment. Thin Solid Films 1993 , 226 (1), 30 –34 . DOI: 10.1016/0040 -6090(93)90201 -y

(52 ) Hoffman, D. W.; Thornton, J. A. The compressive stress transition in Al, V, Zr, Nb and W 

metal films sputtered at low working pressures. Thin Solid Films 1977 , 45 (2), 387 –396. DOI: 

10.1016/0040 -6090(77)90276 -0

(53 ) Thornton, J. A. Influence of apparatus geometry and deposition conditions on the structure 

and topography of thick sputtered coatings. Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology 1974 , 11 

(4), 666 –670. DOI: 10.1116/1.1312732 

(54) Vink, T. J.; Somers, M. a. J.; Daams, J. L. C.; Dirks, A. G. Stress, strain, and microstructure 

of sputter -deposited Mo thin films. Journal of Applied Physics 1991 , 70 (8), 4301 –4308. DOI: 

10.1063/1.349108 

(5 5) Vink, T. J.; Walrave, W.; Daams, J. L. C.; Dirks, A. G.; Somers, M. a. J.; Van Den Aker, K. 

J. A. Stress, strain, and microstructure in thin tungsten films deposited by dc magnetron 

sputtering. Journal of Applied Physics 1993 , 74 (2), 988 –995. DOI: 10.1063/1.354842 

(5 6) Al -Masha’al , A.; Bunting, A.; Cheung, R. Evaluation of residual stress in sputtered tantalum 

thin -film. Applied Surface Science 2016 , 371 , 571 –575. DOI: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.02.236 

(5 7) Tranchant, J.; Tessier, P. Y.; Landesman, J. P.; Djouadi, M. A.; Angleraud, B.; Renault, P. 

O.; Girault, B.; Goudeau, P. Relation between residual stresses and microstructure in Mo(Cr) 

thin films elaborated by ionized magnetron sputtering. Surface and Coatings Technology 2007 ,

202 (11), 2247 –2251. DOI: 10.1016/j.surfcoat.2007.07.030 41 

(5 8) Moseley, P. T.; Seabrook, C. J. The crystal structure of β-tantalum. Acta Crystallographica 

Section B 1973 , 29 (5), 1170 –1171. DOI: 10.1107/s0567740873004140 

(5 9) Mitchell, D. R. G. DiffTools: Electron diffraction software tools for DigitalMicrograph TM .

Microscopy Research and Technique 2008 , 71 (8), 588 –593. DOI: 10.1002/jemt.20591 

(60 ) Jacobse, L.; Huang, Y. -F.; Koper, M. T. M.; Rost, M. J. Correlation of surface site 

formation to nanoisland growth in the electrochemical roughening of Pt(111). Nature Materials 

2018 , 17 (3), 277 –282. DOI: 10.1038/s41563 -017 -0015 -z

(61 ) Jacobse, L.; Rost, M. J.; Koper, M. T. M. Atomic -Scale identification of the electrochemical 

roughening of platinum. ACS Central Science 2019 , 5 (12), 1920 –1928. DOI: 

10.1021/acscentsci.9b00782 

(62 ) Rizo, R.; Fernández -Vidal, J.; Hardwick, L. J.; Attard, G. A.; Vidal -Iglesias, F. J.; Climent, 

V.; Herrero, E.; Feliu, J. M. Investigating the presence of adsorbed species on Pt steps at low 

potentials. Nature Communications 2022 , 13 (1), 2550. DOI: 10.1038/s41467 -022 -30241 -7

(63) Umezawa, K.; Ito, T.; Asada, M.; Nakanishi, S.; Ding, P.; Lanford, W. A.; Hjörvarsson, B. 

Adsorption of hydrogen on the Pt(111) surface from low -energy recoil scattering. Surface 

Science 1997 , 387 (1 –3), 320 –327. DOI: 10.1016/s0039 -6028(97)00367 -1

(6 4) Zolfaghari, A.; Jerkiewicz, G. Temperature -dependent research on Pt(111) and Pt(100) 

electrodes in aqueous H2SO4. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 1999 , 467 (1 –2), 177 –185. 

DOI: 10.1016/s0022 -0728(99)00084 -4

(6 5) Tang, M. T.; Liu, X.; Ji, Y.; Norskov, J. K.; Chan, K. Modeling Hydrogen Evolution 

Reaction Kinetics through Explicit Water –Metal Interfaces. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 

2020 , 124 (51), 28083 –28092. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c08310 

(6 6) Lindgren, P.; Kastlunger, G.; Peterson, A. A. A challenge to the G ∼ 0 interpretation of 

hydrogen evolution. ACS Catalysis 2019 , 10 (1), 121 –128. DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.9b02799 42 

(6 7) Østergaard, F. C.; Bagger, A.; Rossmeisl, J. Predicting catalytic activity in hydrogen 

evolution reaction. Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 2022 , 35 , 101037. DOI: 

10.1016/j.coelec.2022.101037 

(6 8) Khorshidi, A.; Violet, J.; Hashemi, J.; Peterson, A. A. How strain can break the scaling 

relations of catalysis. Nature Catalysis 2018 , 1 (4), 263 –268. DOI: 10.1038/s41929 -018 -0054 -043 

SUPPORTIN G INFORMATION 

Figure S 1. AFM 3D images of all Pt thin films deposited with different sputter pressures. 44 

Figure S 2. Representative 2D diffraction images for samples p1, p8, and p25 showing the 

transition from strongly textured Pt(111) growth to a mixed regime with both textured and 

polycrystalline contributions. Weak diffraction features from the β-Ta adhesion layer an d the 

single -crystalline Si substrate are visible in the 2D images. 45 

Table S 1. Summary of structural and mechanical properties of Pt thin films deposited at different 

sputter pressures. In -plane stress and strain were obtained by DHM, while out -of -plane lattice 

spacing and strain were determined by XRD relative to (d ₁₁₁ ,0 = 0.2265) nm (derived from (a 0 =

0.39237) nm 54 ). The lattice parameter a SAED was obtained from SAED. 

Sample Sputter 

pressure 

(Pa) 

σ||,DHM 

(MPa) 

ε||,DHM 

(%) d₁₁₁ ,XRD (nm) ε⊥,XRD (%) aSAED 

p1 0.133 -190.1 -0.16 0.2265 0.087 0.39499 

p2 0.267 -76.2 -0.06 0.2264 0.024 0.39498 

p4 0.533 111.1 0.09 0.2260 -0.15 4

p5 0.667 166.9 0.14 0.2258 -0.240 

p6 0.800 325.4 0.28 0.225 6 -0.312 

p7 1.067 374.2 0.32 0.2255 -0.360 0.39428 

p8 1.066 658.6 0.56 0.2247 -0.69 4 0.39437 

p10 1.332 426.8 0.36 0.2254 -0.408 

p12 1.600 443.2 0.38 0.2253 -0.45 6 0.39441 

p20 2.667 280.0 0.24 0.2254 -0.379 

p25 3.333 295.2 0.23 0.2255 -0.360 0.39377