Title: A Surfactant Prediction Model for Rising Bubbles

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.22607v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Apr 2026 01:01:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# A Surfactant Prediction Model for Rising Bubbles 

# Lim Chi Tung James 1, Ivo R. Peters 1, Swathi Krishna 1∗

> 1

Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, S016 7QF 

> ∗

s.b.krishna@soton.ac.uk April 27, 2026 

Abstract 

Bubbles released from a needle show shape deformations that depend on the surfactant concentration of the surrounding liquid. We develop a model that predicts the surfactant concentration based on experimental early-stage observations of these deformations. Using high-speed imaging, we examine bubbles within the first 144 ms of ascent, corresponding to a vertical rise distance of ∼ 40 mm and extract the instantaneous aspect ratio ( AR ) and analyse its temporal evolution. In clean conditions, bubbles exhibit pronounced shape oscillations resulting from the periodic exchange between surface and kinetic energy. The presence of surfactants leads to an immediate damping of these oscillations, characterised by reduced AR amplitudes and earlier peak deformations. This damping effect intensifies with increasing surfactant concentration until a near-saturation regime is reached, beyond which bubbles remain largely spherical and further increases in concentration produce indistinguishable AR profiles within the early-stage observation window. To develop the prediction model, an aspect-ratio-based analysis methodology is proposed, which yields an empirical relationship capable of estimating surfactant concentrations between 0 ppm and 2 .9 ppm. We finally test the reliability of the model on unknown surfactant-laden bubbles. The model successfully detected the presence and relative extent of surfactant contamination as higher concentrations were introduced. 

Keywords: Bubble Rise Dynamics, Shape Deformation, Interfacial Contamination, Surfac-tant Prediction Model 

1. Introduction 

Extensive research on the rise behaviours of air bubbles has been motivated by its vital role in multiple chemical engineering processes such as mixing of liquid and gas phases in bubble column reactors (Mart´ ın et al., 2009; Becerril et al., 2002) and separation of min-eral particles through froth floatation (Mesa and Parada, 2018). In these applications, the understanding of bubble interfacial dynamics when coated with surfactants and/or particles is crucial in optimising overall process efficiencies by maximising collision and attachment probabilities (Kostoglou et al., 2020; Evans et al., 2008) and mass transfer rates (Mart´ ın et al., 2009; Montes et al., 1999). However, direct measurement of inter-facial properties can be challenging and invasive in such systems. Establishing reliable correlations between quantifiable bubble dynamics, such as rise velocity and shape os-cillations, with surfactant levels could simplify efficiency evaluations and provide more accurate, real-time insights into interfacial phenomena. Considerable efforts have been devoted to predicting the steady-state velocity of rising bubbles in quiescent liquid, termed as the terminal rise velocity, UT , as it often serves as a characteristic parameter in evaluating system performance in engineering applications (Hlawitschka et al., 2022). The rise of a bubble is driven by its buoyancy force, FB ,which for a given difference between liquid and gas density, ∆ ρ = ρl −ρg and gravitational 1

> arXiv:2604.22607v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 24 Apr 2026

acceleration g, is a function of the bubble’s volume V , commonly quantified by its volume equivalent diameter (Fan et al., 2021) as-

deq = 3

r6Vπ (1) such that 

FB = πd 3

> eq

ρlg

6 , (2) where we have approximated the density difference between the liquid and gas phase ∆ρ ≈ ρl because ρl ≫ ρg. The buoyancy force is resisted by the total drag force, FD,consisting of form drag, friction drag, and virtual or added mass force (Zhang et al., 2008; Nalajala and Kishore, 2014), all combined in a drag coefficient CD, giving 

FD = CDρlU 2πd 2

> eq

8 . (3) At steady state, the balance between these forces yields 

UT =

r4gd eq 

3CD

, (4) which shows that the key to predicting the terminal velocity lies in the formulation of the drag coefficient, CD and its dependence on bubble and liquid properties. Terminal rise velocities of bubbles spanning equivalent diameters 0 .02 mm < d eq <

67 .0 mm have been systematically compiled and compared against a wide range of ana-lytical and empirical drag-coefficient correlations (Feng et al., 2024). Distinct regimes of bubble behaviour—spherical, ellipsoidal, and spherical-cap—have been identified based on bubble size, with the terminal velocity of UT exhibiting regime-dependent trends (Clift et al., 1978). Bubbles with equivalent diameters in the range 1 mm - 17 mm which are typical of many practical applications and form the focus of the present study, lie within the ellipsoidal regime. This regime is characterised by pronounced shape oscillations and the onset of path instability for deq > 2 mm. Owing to these unsteady deformations, drag correlations for ellipsoidal bubbles are commonly expressed in terms of the E¨ otv¨ os num-ber, Eo , which quantifies the interaction between buoyancy and surface-tension forces governing bubble shape stability as-

Eo = ∆ρ g d 2

> eq

γ , (5) where γ is the surface tension. In the ellipsoidal regime, increased drag associated with path instability leads to a counter-intuitive decrease in the terminal rise velocity with increasing equivalent diameter up to 7 mm, a behaviour not observed in the spherical or spherical-cap regimes (Feng et al., 2024; Mougin and Magnaudet, 2001, 2006; J. C and Martinez-Bazan, 2016). Substantial effort has been devoted to extending bubble rise-velocity correlations to contaminated systems, beyond studies restricted to bubbles rising in clean water. Two primary contamination mechanisms are commonly identified in the literature: direct deposition of particles onto the bubble interface and gradual surfactant accumulation during ascent in surfactant-laden liquids. 2Particle deposition onto bubble interfaces prior to release is widely reported to re-tard interfacial motion, resulting in increased drag and reduced terminal rise velocities compared to clean bubbles (Peebles and Garber, 1953; Wang et al., 2019a,b; Eskanlou et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2017, 2018, 2021; Zheng et al., 2019). The magnitude of this effect increases with the degree of surface contamination, commonly quantified by the particle-surface coverage, ϕ. It is defined as ϕ = Ap/A b, where Ap is the surface area covered by particles and Ab the total surface area of the bubble. A pronounced reduction of 24.6% in the terminal rise velocity has been reported as ϕ increased from 0% to 50% (Yan et al., 2021). Beyond this range, further reductions in terminal velocities diminish and eventually plateau as surface contamination approaches saturation for ϕ ≥ 70%. In addition to interfacial immobilisation, increasing particle size raises the effective density of particle-coated bubbles, reducing the density difference relative to the surrounding fluid and thereby decreasing the buoyancy force FB . This reduction in buoyancy leads to lower terminal rise velocities for bubbles coated with larger particles (Wang et al., 2019b; Yan et al., 2021). In contrast to the direct introduction of particles onto bubble surfaces as performed in the aforementioned studies, a different mechanism governs the interfacial dynamics of bubbles rising through surfactant-laden fluids. As the bubble rises, surfactant molecules accumulate on the interface and are convected from the front toward the rear, establishing an interfacial concentration gradient. This concentration gradient generates a correspond-ing surface-tension gradient, with lower surface tension toward the bubble rear, giving rise to tangential Marangoni stresses along the interface (Peebles and Garber, 1953; Clift et al., 1978; Tomiyama et al., 2002). These stresses progressively immobilise the bub-ble surface, effectively transitioning the interface from a free-slip to a no-slip condition. This effect increases the frictional drag experienced by the rising bubble, reducing its rise velocity until a steady state UT is reached. Although higher surfactant concentrations have been shown to reduce the rise distance required for bubbles to reach their UT , the magnitude of UT itself is insensitive to bulk surfactant concentrations (Zhang and Finch, 2001; Tomiyama et al., 2002; Kracht and Finch, 2010). High-speed imaging studies have demonstrated a strong correlation between instan-taneous rise velocity and bubble shape (Kracht and Finch, 2010; Wang et al., 2019a). As a bubble ascends, the periodic exchange of surface energy and kinetic energy induces an oscillating shape deformation between spherical and ellipsoidal phases, which can be quantified by its aspect ratio, AR defined as the ratio between the semi-major length and semi-minor length. This dynamic results in an oscillatory rise behaviour, where veloc-ity fluctuates periodically with shape changes. Surface impurities—whether surfactant molecules or adhering particles—promote interfacial immobilisation. This immobilisa-tion suppresses shape deformations, resulting in reduced amplitude and frequency in AR 

oscillation profiles (Chabel et al., 2012; Kracht and Finch, 2010; Wang et al., 2019a; Yan et al., 2021). Progressive damping of shape oscillations promotes a tendency toward near-spherical bubble geometries as interfacial contamination levels increase. This effect becomes increasingly pronounced with greater surface coverage by larger particles and has also been observed following coalescence between clean and particle-laden bubbles (Wang et al., 2019a,b; Eskanlou et al., 2018; Ata, 2008; Wang and Parada, 2020). Given the evident link between interfacial contamination and damped shape oscil-lations, this study aims to identify quantifiable indicators from AR profiles of bubbles rising in fluids with varying surfactant concentrations. The present work focuses on the early-stage dynamics immediately following bubble detachment from a needle. This offers 3Figure 1: Schematic diagram of experimental setup insight into the sensitivity of evolving interfacial conditions to initial shape deformations, information which is lost when analysing terminal velocity, steady-state oscillations, or path instabilities. Using high-speed imaging, the rise velocity and AR oscillation profiles of bubbles in the ellipsoidal regime are analysed. The goal is to establish a reliable metric for predicting surrounding surfactant levels based on dynamic bubble behaviour. In doing so, this work addresses a critical gap in the literature: the absence of a direct correlation between early-stage bubble rise characteristics and interfacial conditions - an aspect that remains overlooked in traditional drag- and terminal velocity-based models. 

2. Methodology 2.1. Experimental Setup and Procedure 

The experimental setup consists of a square tank (180 mm × 180 mm × 180 mm) in which bubbles released from a dispensing needle with an inner diameter of 1.19 mm were studied, as shown in figure 1. The experiments were conducted under ambient laboratory conditions, with the tank filled with 5 litres of tap water and ambient air supplied to the needle using a programmable syringe pump (NE-1000). Bubble motion was recorded using a JAI Go 5000M camera operating at 125 frames per second (fps). The rectangular field of view was positioned to capture the bubble trajectory from detachment to 15 mm below the free surface, corresponding to a total vertical rise distance of approximately 50 mm at a spatial resolution of ∼ 20 pixels/mm. Illumination was provided by a focused backlight transmitted through a diffuser sheet using broadband halogen fibre-optic illuminators from Thorlabs. The first step of the study involved quantifying bubble rise characteristics in fluid media of varying surfactant concentrations. Precise masses of the non-ionic surfactant Triton X-100 (TX-100) were weighed using an analytical balance with a minimum reso-lution of 0.1 mg and progressively mixed with water to obtain the target concentrations. The prepared solutions were left to rest for 24 hours to ensure a uniform surfactant dis-tribution and no surface foaming. The surfactant concentrations investigated, together with their estimated surface tensions calculated using the Szyszkowski equation (Tagawa et al., 2014), are summarised in Table 1. For clarity, all cases are hereafter referred to by their surfactant concentrations expressed in ppm. 4Concentration by Mass ppm mol /m3 γ (mN /m) Clean (Tap Water) - - 72.8* 0.001% 0.3 0.02 49.2 0.0025% 0.7 0.04 43.1 0.005% 1.5 0.08 38.1 0.01% 2.9 0.16 33.3 0.02% 5.8 0.32 28.3 Table 1: Concentrations of TX-100 solutions with surface tensions estimated using Szyszkowski equation (Tagawa et al., 2014). *Surface tension of water assumed as that of pure water, subsequent values are calculated to show relative change from addition of surfactants. 

> 0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> Probability

Clean 

> 0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> Probability

0.7 ppm 

> 4–4.25
> 4.25–4.5
> 4.5–4.75
> 4.75–5.0
> 5.0–5.25
> 5.25–5.5
> 5.5–5.75
> 0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4

Bubble Diameter (mm) Probability  5.8 ppm Figure 2: Distribution of bubble diameters investigated for different concentration cases. 5Figure 3: Surfactant injection apparatus For each concentration case, individual bubbles were released into the solution through the dispensing needle. Bubble diameters in the range 4 .0 mm–6 .0 mm were generated by varying the syringe-pump volumetric flow rate from 5 mL /min to 20 mL /min. The result-ing bubble-size distribution for increasing concentration cases used in this study is shown in figure 2. Minor variations in the bubble-size distribution were observed with increasing surfactant concentration. Although bubbles with diameters between 4 .75 mm − 5.0 mm were most prevalent across all cases, a small downward shift in the mean diameter is ap-parent at higher surfactant concentrations. Accounting for bubble-to-bubble variability and experimental noise, this trend is considered negligible for the present study, and all bubbles investigated (4 .0 mm ≤ deq ≤ 6.0 mm) remain within the same dynamical regime (Tomiyama et al., 2002). 

2.2. Surfactant Injection Setup 

For a final proof-of-principle experiment that qualitatively assesses the proposed pre-diction framework’s capability to identify surfactant-laden bubbles from a sequence of imaged bubbles, a dedicated surfactant injection apparatus was developed. The appara-tus consists of a 3D-printed housing incorporating a secondary injection needle oriented perpendicular to the bubble-dispensing needle, enabling controlled pulses of premixed TX-100 solution to be delivered to the exit area of the dispensing needle, as shown in figure 3. To prevent interference with bubble growth prior to detachment, the tip-to-tip distance between the two needles was fixed at 4 mm for all tests, exceeding the radius of the largest bubbles generated ( ∼ 3 mm). Surfactant solutions were delivered using a stepper-motor-driven microsyringe pump controlled by an Arduino Uno, with the motor speed and step count programmed to dispense 10 μL of TX-100 solution at a flow rate of 1 mL /min on demand. A steady stream of bubbles in a surfactant-free water medium was generated by fixing 6-8 0 8 16 24 32 

0

5

10 

15 

20 last bubble captured before detachment 

> Needle Tip

Time (ms) 

> Vertical Rise (mm)

Figure 4: First 6 bubble images captured starting from the moment before detachment from the needle, rising in tap water, separated by ∆ t = 8 ms. For scale, the outer diameter of the needle is 1 .61 mm. These raw images can be found in ’A1’ from the supplementary material the flow rate of the air syringe pump at 20 mL /min, producing approximately 4 bubbles per second. An imaging period of 4 s was initiated through a manual trigger sent from the computer to the camera. The surfactant-injection pump was set to activate 1 .5 s after imaging commenced, delivering 10 μL of the specified surfactant concentration. All bubbles generated within the 4 s imaging period, including any surfactant-affected bubbles, are recorded and their rise characteristics extracted for the prediction model. 

2.3. Image Processing 

Captured images were processed using a Python script to extract the bubble size, aspect ratio AR , and rise velocity. Bubble sizes were quantified using the volume-equivalent diameter deq as given in (1), where the total bubble volume V is determined from the last image before bubble detachment (figure 4). The bubble volume was calculated using edge detection and assuming axial symmetry. A series of images is selected spanning the interval from immediately prior to detach-ment until the bubble exits the camera field of view. An example of first six images in a representative sequence are shown in figure 4, where t = 0 is defined as the first frame where the bubble has detached from the needle. Bubble contours are detected in each frame and the corresponding centroid coordinates are extracted. With the cam-era operating at 125 fps, successive frames are separated by a time interval, ∆ t of 8 ms .The centroid position is plotted as a function of time, and the gradient of a linear fit is evaluated to obtain the average rise velocity u. An example of a typical clean bubble is illustrated in figure 5. Uncertainties in the values of deq and AR arise from pixel-level edge detection, where partially occupied pixels may be either fully counted or omitted during contour identifi-cation. Therefore, a maximum uncertainty of ±1 pixel is considered. Across all bubbles recorded in this study, this translates to an approximate maximum error in deq and AR 

of ±1.4% and ±2.8% respectively. Accounting additionally for uncertainties associated with spatial resolution and imaging frequency, the uncertainty in the mean rise velocity 

u is estimated to lie between 1 .5% and 2 .6%. 70 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

Time (ms) 

> Centroid vertical position (mm)

Centroid position 

Linear fit 

Figure 5: Detected centroid vertical position against time for a typical bubble rising in tap water relative to the position where bubble is first fully detached from the needle at 

t = 0 ms 

3. Results and Discussion 3.1. Rise Velocity 

The average rise velocities u of individual bubbles released in solutions with varying TX-100 concentrations are presented in figure 6, together with predicted terminal rise velocities UT for clean bubbles obtained from theoretical drag correlations (Lehrer, 1976; Clift et al., 1978). Close agreement is observed between the measured mean rise velocity in clean water and predictions from the drag correlation of Lehrer (1976), whereas the correlation of Clift et al. (1978) underpredicts the measurements by an average of ap-proximately 10%. Consistent across both predictions and the present measurements is a downwards trend in rise velocity as bubble diameter increases. This phenomenon has been attributed to additional drag from path oscillations experienced by bubbles in the ellipsoidal regime. However, this trend does not persist for larger bubbles ( deq > 7 mm), for which path oscillations are minimal and oscillation frequencies are near zero (Lindt, 1972; Li et al., 2015). In general, the introduction of surfactants at concentrations below 1 .5 ppm exerts a negligible influence on the early-stage rise velocity. Interestingly, bubbles rising in the 0.3 ppm and 0 .7 ppm solutions exhibit slightly higher rise velocities ( ∼ 5%) compared to those in the clean system. However, considering the significant noise in the data, no definitive trend can be established without further validations. At higher surfactant concentrations, a reduction in u of up to 21% is observed for bubbles with diameters smaller than 5 mm. This behaviour is consistent with previous observations that the distance required for bubbles to decelerate to their UT decreases in the presence of surfactants Zhang and Finch (2001); Tomiyama et al. (2002). Although the bubbles in the present setup have not yet reached UT within the imaged timeframe, those released in the higher concentration solutions undergo greater deceleration, which likely contributes to the lower measured values of u .These findings suggest that at concentrations above 1 .5 ppm, the accumulation of sur-83.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5

0.16 

0.18 

0.2

0.22 

0.24 

0.26 

0.28 

0.3

0.32 

0.34 

Bubble diameter (mm) 

> Rise velocity (m/s)

Clean 

0.3 ppm 

0.7 ppm 

1.5 ppm 

2.9 ppm 

5.8 ppm 

Lehrer (1976) 

Clift et al. (1978) 

Figure 6: Average rise velocity, u against bubble diameter for different surfactant con-centrations, and drag-based terminal rise velocity, UT predictions for clean bubbles by Lehrer (1976) and Clift et al. (1978) factant molecules at the bubble interface leads to measurable reductions in u. However, this effect does not scale proportionally with further increases in TX-100 concentration, as the mean u across the range of bubble diameters remains at ∼ 0.25 m /s in the two highest concentration cases. Moreover, bubbles larger than 5 mm appear largely insensitive to changes in concentration. The relatively small variability and non-monotonic changes in measured rise velocities suggest that early-stage rise velocity is not a sufficiently distin-guishing parameter for characterising rise dynamics across surfactant concentrations. 

3.2. Aspect Ratio 

The temporal evolution of the aspect ratio ( AR ) of clean bubbles within the first 144 ms after release is shown in figure 7. Immediately after detachment, the bubble remains nearly spherical ( AR ∼ 1), as observed from the first bubble in figure 4. Subsequently, inertial forces associated with its release initiate a deformation from a spherical bubble to an ellipsoidal disk shape, as seen in insets (a) and (b) in figure 7. The AR increases until it reaches an average peak value of 4.4 after approximately 60 ms. Following this peak (d), the bubble transitions back towards a near-spherical shape (e-f), and begins oscillating around its dynamic equilibrium aspect ratio, AR eq . Although it appears that the bubble’s shape is visually stabilised at this stage, smaller-amplitude oscillations are expected to continue during further ascent (Kracht and Finch, 2010; Wang et al., 2019a; Chabel et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2019b). AR eq is calculated as the mean of the last four values of the AR measured between 120 ms and 144 ms and yielding AR eq = 1 .56 ± 0.48 for clean bubbles. Because the current research focuses on the initial rise dynamics up to 144 ms after detachment, this equilibrium aspect ratio merely serves as a metric to quantify the final state of the bubble within the imaging period and must not be assumed 90 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 

0

1

2

3

4

5 

> (a)
> (b)
> (c) (d)
> (e)
> (f)

Time (ms) 

> Aspect Ratio

Figure 7: Aspect ratio as a function of time for bubbles released in clean water. Error bars are deduced from variations between repeated experiments. to be the long-term steady state value. While it might be beneficial to investigate AR 

profiles at later times, the largest oscillation magnitudes occur during the early stage and are captured within the initial cycle. The parameters extracted within this period, as later shown, are significantly sensitive to the tested concentrations in the prediction model. The shape oscillations of bubbles in the various surfactant-laden media are presented in figure 8. An increased damping effect was observed where bubble shapes became more spherical as surface contamination increased, confirming observations from previous studies (Kracht and Finch, 2010; Wang et al., 2019a,b). This effect is most noticeable when inspecting the bubbles at a vertical position of approximately 10 mm from the detachment point, where the presence of a distinct ellipsoidal phase diminishes at higher surfactant concentrations. The temporal AR variations were quantified for a minimum of 30 bubbles in each surfactant solution. The mean AR profiles with standard deviations are presented for all cases in figure 9. A general oscillation behaviour similar to clean bubbles is observed across all cases, where the AR rises to a peak after release and gradually settles near the AR eq . However, systematic changes in the magnitude and timing of this peak can be deduced as surfac-tant concentrations increase. The peak aspect ratio, AR peak decreases immediately with the introduction of surfactants, signifying a noticeable damping effect that attenuates shape oscillations even at low concentrations. This damping effect amplifies with higher surfactant concentrations, where AR peak values approach a minimum in the 2 .9 ppm and 5.8 ppm cases, depicted in figure 9(b). The increased surfactant-induced damping also shifts the time required to reach the peak aspect ratio, tpeak , to earlier values with each increasing concentration. The di-minishing shape oscillations produce a less pronounced ellipsoidal phase (figure 8). This reduces tpeak and allows contaminated bubbles to begin relaxing towards the equilibrium 

AR earlier. These trends observed from the AR profiles in figure 9(a) are quantified and the averages for the respective concentrations are presented in table 2. At surfactant concentrations above 1 .5 ppm, damping occurs almost immediately 10 0 0.3 0.7 1.5 2.9 5.8 

0

5

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

Surfactant Concentration (ppm) 

> Vertical Rise (mm)

Figure 8: Bubble shape oscillations in different surfactant concentration solutions (the time instance of each bubble in its series is (2 i − 2) · ∆t for i = 1 , 2, 3, . . . ). The full time series can be found in the supplementary material as ’Movie 1’, ’Movie 2’ etc. respectively, named in increasing order with surfactant concentrations 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 12345Time (ms) Aspect Ratio 

> Clean
> 0.3ppm
> 0.7ppm
> 1.5ppm
> 2.9ppm
> 5.8ppm

0 2 4 62345Concentration (ppm) Peak Aspect Ratio (a) (b) Figure 9: (a) Average aspect ratio profiles for different surfactant concentrations; (b) Peak aspect ratio vs surfactant concentration Concentration (ppm) AR peak tpeak (ms) AR eq teq (ms) Clean 4.72 59.84 1.56 92.48 0.3 3.78 38.12 1.45 71.76 0.7 2.77 24.66 1.31 61.11 1.5 2.16 24.00 1.21 48.00 2.9 1.87 29.84 1.17 92.72 5.8 1.88 38.45 1.29 51.55 Table 2: Average features of bubbles in different surfactant concentrations 11 after bubble release, and a distinct ellipsoidal phase is often absent. Throughout the measurement period, the AR values remain below 2, with only small fluctuations observed slightly above the final AR eq . To distinguish the presence of an ellipsoidal bubble phase, a threshold of AR = 2 .5 is defined between the values measured for concentrations 0.7 ppm and 1 .5 ppm. This threshold is chosen to be higher than the average AR peak plus one standard deviation measured at 1 .5 ppm, thereby avoiding misclassification of weak oscillations as ellipsoidal deformation. Using this criterion, individual bubble images can be classified according to the presence of an ellipsoidal phase, and is later used as a distinguishing feature in the prediction model discussed in Section 5.1. At higher concentrations, the absence of a pronounced initial peak occasionally results in maximum AR values occurring later during the ascent. This behaviour skews the average tpeak and teq producing inflated values for 2 .9 ppm and 5 .8 ppm cases reported in table 2 which deviate from the otherwise decreasing trend. Comparison of the two highest concentrations reveals nearly identical AR profiles and very similar AR peak values. This finding suggests that the resulting accumulation of surfactant molecules on the bubble’s interface approaches saturation at 2 .9 ppm, beyond which further increases in concentrations produce only marginal changes to bubble shape dynamics. A final general observation is that clean bubbles exhibit the largest standard deviations in aspect ratio between different experiments. Although all clean bubbles are released in the same water solution, the observed variability suggests the presence of small differences in local contamination levels arising from experimental limitations in maintaining pure surfactant-free conditions. This highlights the inherent high sensitivity of clean bubbles to contamination and is in line with the highest drop in AR peak seen in figure 9(b) at the lowest concentrations. 

4. Predicting Surfactant Concentrations from Aspect Ratio Variations 

Experiments conducted in surfactant-laden media with concentrations ranging from 0 .3 ppm to 5 .8 ppm demonstrate that both rise velocity and shape oscillations generally decrease for bubbles released in more concentrated media. Although measurable reductions in u

are observed for concentrations above 1 .5 ppm, the results do not establish a consistent relationship between rise velocity and surfactant concentration across the range of bubble sizes tested. In contrast, the aspect ratio ( AR ) variations reveal a clear damping effect on shape oscillations following the introduction of surfactants, with distinct transient profiles persisting up to the 2 .9 ppm case (figure 9). Beyond this concentration the damping effect reaches a plateau, and the corresponding AR profiles become largely indistinguishable. Building on these findings, the following section introduces a workflow to derive a predictive relationship between bubble shape oscillations during initial ascent and the surrounding surfactant concentration. Because of the observed similarity in behaviour at the two highest concentrations, only empirical AR data from the clean to 2 .9 ppm cases are used. 

4.1. Feature Extraction and Selection 

Several indicators, as presented in Table 2, can be directly extracted to characterise the general behaviour of the AR profiles, most notably the magnitude and timing of the bubble’s most pronounced ellipsoidal state, denoted by AR peak and tpeak . To further characterise the oscillatory behaviour across all cases, additional quantitative features 12 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3

8 · 10 −2

0.1

0.12 

0.14 

> teq  (s)

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3

50 

100 

150 

200 

250 

300 

Surfactant Concentration (ppm) 

> ˙AR max  (s −1)

Figure 10: Variation of features extracted from measured AR profiles with the strongest and weakest correlations to surfactant concentrations up to 2 .9ppm : (a) Max rate of change, ˙AR max ; (b) Time to dynamic equilibrium, teq 

were identified and are summarised in table 3. Derived from averaged and individual bubble AR trends, these features serve to evaluate the intensity of shape oscillations. As higher surfactant concentrations induce stronger damping effects, the correspond-ing feature values are expected to decrease. The extent to which these features respond to varying concentrations determines their effectiveness in distinguishing between cases. To assess this sensitivity, the Pearson correlation coefficient, r is employed to quantify the relationship between each feature and surfactant concentration. 

rx,s =

Pni=1 (xi − ¯x)( si − ¯s)

pP ni=1 (xi − ¯x)2 Pni=1 (si − ¯s)2 (6) where rx,s is the correlation between the value of a particular feature x and surfactant concentration s, and ¯ x and ¯ s are their respective mean values across all measured cases. The computed r values for all identified features are tabulated in table 4. The Pear-son coefficient quantifies the strength and direction of a linear relationship between two parameters, where values close to 1 or −1 indicate strong positive or negative linear cor-relations, respectively, while a value near zero suggests no linear relationship. Apart from 

teq , all features exhibit negative correlations of varying strengths with surfactant concen-tration. To further illustrate the variation between features of high and low r values, individual features are examined across the tested concentrations. The mean and standard deviation of two representative features across all concentra-tion cases— the most strongly correlated feature, the maximum rate of change in aspect ratio, ˙AR max , and the weakest correlated feature teq — are presented in Figure 10. A clear decrease in ˙AR max is observed with increasing surfactant concentration, reflecting the pro-gressive suppression of peak AR values. The separation of feature distributions across concentrations further highlights its potential as a reliable predictor. In contrast, teq ex-hibits no obvious trend and shows substantial scatter in all cases, further emphasising its limited sensitivity to damping effects. These comparisons highlight the contrast between 13 Feature Description 

AR peak Maximum AR value achieved during the rise. 

AR peak = max (AR )

tpeak Time taken to reach AR peak .

AR eq Mean AR value after 120 ms. 

AR eq = 1

nt> 120 ms 

X

> ti≥120 ms

AR( ti)where n is the number of recorded AR values. 

teq Time instance where AR eq is first reached. ¯AR Mean AR value throughout rise. ¯AR = 1

n

X

> i

AR i

σAR Standard deviation of AR .

σAR =

s 1

n

X

> i

(AR i − AR mean )2

tellip Time period where AR is above a preset elliptical threshold of 

AR = 2.5 (discussed in section 3.2) ˙AR max Maximum rate of change of AR .˙AR max = max 

AR (ti+1 ) − AR (ti)∆t



where ∆ t = 8 ms based on the camera’s capture rate of 125 fps. ∆pt Peak to trough ratio. ∆pt = max( AR )min( AR )

AU C AR Area under curve of AR variation against time. 

AU C AR = X

> i

AR (ti+1 ) + AR (ti)2 (ti+1 − ti)Table 3: Summary of extracted features from AR variation profiles. 14 Feature Pearson correlation coefficient, r

with respect to surfactant concentration 

teq 0.008 

tpeak -0.445 

AR eq -0.587 

AU C AR -0.762 ∆pt -0.763 ¯AR -0.765 

tellip -0.791 

σAR -0.805 

AR peak -0.833 ˙AR max -0.835 Table 4: Correlation of extracted features with surfactant concentration features that robustly capture concentration-dependent behaviour and those that remain less informative. Consequently, this makes feature selection essential, ensuring that only features with strong and consistent relationships are retained for model development. A feature selection procedure was implemented to retain features with meaningful predictive influence while discarding those contributing to noise or inaccuracies. All extracted features are first ranked by their absolute correlation coefficient values, |r|,with the ordering reflected in table 4. A variable threshold was then introduced and systematically increased to exclude features with |r| values below the threshold. The threshold increments were selected so that only one additional feature is excluded at a time. This creates a series of candidate feature sets, each representing a progressively stricter selection criteria. For each set, the features were used to form a cumulative index that yields an interpretable trend with surfactant concentrations. Details on the derivation of this index is described in the following subsections. Once obtained, the index is used to estimate predicted concentration value for all tested bubbles, which are then compared with the experimentally prescribed concentrations. To determine the threshold that yields the optimal feature set, two performance met-rics were evaluated from the predictions: error and uncertainty. The error metric was computed as the mean percentage deviation from the experimentally prescribed surfac-tant concentrations. The uncertainty metric was derived from the spread of predicted values at each concentration. Using the standard deviation of the computed index, upper and lower bounds were obtained in addition to the central prediction, and the difference between these bounds was taken as a measure of prediction confidence. For each candidate feature set, these metrics were evaluated across all concentra-tion cases. Both were normalised by their maximum values to allow comparability, and 15 0.0 

> 0.44
> 0.58
> 0.75
> 0.762
> 0.764
> 0.79
> 0.8
> 0.82
> 0.834

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

Threshold 

> Normalised Value

Error 

Uncertainty 

Score 

Figure 11: Variation of prediction error, uncertainty and score with imposed threshold values subsequently combined into a single performance score defined as: Score = 0 .5 · Error + 0 .5 · Uncertainty (7) By assigning both metrics an equal weight, the score provides a balanced measure of pre-dictive accuracy and reliability. Figure 11 presents the trend of both normalised metrics and the final scores for each threshold value imposed to give the individual candidate feature sets. The trends clearly indicate that when up to a |r| threshold of 0.44 is applied, and all weakly correlated features are included, the derived prediction model exhibits the largest errors and uncertainties. When only the strongest correlated feature is retained with the threshold set at 0.83, minimum error is observed. This outcome is expected, as predictions is only driven solely by the most-sensitive feature, eliminating any noise from weaker correlating features. However, as shown in figure 10, variations in feature values between bubbles persist at each concentration, and relying on a single feature amplifies this variability, leading to higher uncertainties. Incorporating multiple features with relatively high |r| values introduces an averaging effect, improving robustness and confidence in predictions. Ultimately, the optimal set of features yielding the minimum score was identified at a threshold of |r| = 0.8. 

4.2. Aspect Ratio Damping Index 

While individual high-correlated features provide useful insight into the damping be-haviour induced by increasing surfactant concentrations, relying on any one in isolation limits the robustness of predictions. The Aspect Ratio Damping Index ( ARDI ) condenses the selected features into a single quantitative indicator, establishing a link between bub-16 Selected Feature Pearson correlation coefficient, r Assigned Weight, W

˙AR max -0.835 0.338 

AR peak -0.833 0.337 

σAR -0.805 0.325 Table 5: W and r values of selected features ble shape oscillation dynamics and surfactant concentrations. We define the index as: 

ARDI =

> N

X

> i=1

Xi · Wi (8) where N is the total number of selected features, Xi is the standardised value of feature 

xi, and Wi is its assigned weight. Standardisation is performed across all recorded bubbles as: 

Xi = xi − ¯xσx

(9) With ¯ x and σx denoting the mean and standard deviation of the feature across all con-centrations, respectively. The weight of each feature is determined from its relative r

value listed in table 4 as: 

Wi = | ri |

P | rselected | (10) The final set of selected features from imposing the determined threshold of |r| = 0.8 and their corresponding weights alongside their initial r values are summarised in table 5. It is noted that the W is nearly identical across the selected features owing to their similar 

r values. Using these tabulated parameters, the ARDI of every bubble can be evaluated by extracting the features from their measured AR profiles and using eq. 8. The resulting average ARDI values across the tested concentrations are presented in figure 12. The derived relationship between ARDI and surfactant concentration provides a di-rect and interpretable means of estimating concentration from the transient AR behaviour of rising bubbles. Confidence bounds are obtained from the upper and lower fitted curves, quantifying the uncertainty in predictions based on variability within the dataset. The fitted expressions of ARDI as a function of surfactant concentration, s, for each of these curves are presented below: 

ARDI (s)mean = −1.781 + 2.189 0.704 + s (11) 

ARDI (s)upper = −1.657 + 2.196 0.635 + s (12) 

ARDI (s)lower = −1.906 + 2.204 0.799 + s (13) The value of ARDI decays with higher concentrations, mirroring the damping effect on shape oscillations. At high concentrations, the index appears to be approaching a plateau. This behaviour reflects the diminishing changes in AR variation as surfactant concentrations exceed 2 .9 ppm, as observed in figure 9 and discussed in section 3.2. This 17 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3

−1.5

−1

−0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Surfactant Concentration (ppm) 

> ARDI

Mean Fit 

Upper std Fit 

Lower std Fit 

Mean ± std 

Figure 12: ARDI against surfactant concentration with mean fit and ±σ envelopes saturation effect highlights a practical limitation of the current model, as predictions become less reliable when AR -based features converge and lose distinctiveness. Owing to the standardisation procedure, the computed ARDI values lie predominantly within the range of −1 to +1. Bubbles released in clean water yield ARDI values close to +1, where the largest deviations are also observed, demonstrating the sensitivity of interfacial dynamics to even trace levels of contamination. In contrast, ARDI values near −1correspond to bubbles in highly surfactant-rich media, which in the present study is capped at 2 .9 ppm surfactant concentration. 

4.3. Quality of Predictions 

The prescribed methodology aims to provide a systematic empirical approach to derive the relationship between surfactant levels and a quantifiable index representative of bubble shape damping effects. This subsection analyses the performance of the derived model by producing predicted concentrations of the bubbles recorded in the experiments. Unlike in the feature selection process, where a global average of error and uncertainty were used to guide the choice of features, the present analysis reports these quantities individually for each tested concentration. This provides a clearer picture of how prediction accuracy varies with surfactant level, and highlights the relative strengths and limitations of the model under different conditions. From ARDI values computed for each recorded bubble, surfactant concentration pre-dictions can be made by inverting the obtained relationships (11) - (13). The error is then defined as the percentage deviation between the predicted value using the mean ARDI fit and actual experimental concentrations. Figure 13 presents the predicted values averaged across all bubbles in each tested surfactant concentration with their relative error. The results demonstrate that the derived model is capable of distinguishing bubbles released in both high and low surfactant concentration media, reinforcing the robustness of ARDI as a predictive indicator. At low concentrations, bubble dynamics are highly sensitive to even small changes in surfactant concentration, resulting in significant varia-tions in shape oscillation profiles and, consequently, in the extracted features. This strong 18 0ppm 0.3ppm 0.7ppm 1.5ppm 2.9ppm 

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

> -13.9%
> +16.0%
> +19.8%
> -9.8%

Concentrations Tested 

> Surfactant Concentration (ppm)

Actual 

Predicted 

Figure 13: Predicted surfactant concentrations using ARDI (s)mean (eq. 11) of recorded bubbles compared against actual experimental concentrations; with standard deviation for each concentration case and relative error in percentage annotated in red. behavioural contrast benefits the model, where predictions are less sensitive to small un-certainties in ARDI as seen from the steep slope at lower concentrations in figure 12. At intermediate concentrations between 0 .3 ppm and 1 .5 ppm, bubbles continue to ex-hibit relatively large variations in oscillation behaviour but also become more sensitive to 

ARDI , leading to moderate increases in prediction error. The model’s ability to discrim-inate intermediate concentrations is evident from the standard deviation bands in figure 13, where they remain disjoint between cases up till 2 .9 ppm. Here, where oscillations are heavily damped and changes in concentration produce only minute variations in AR pro-files, high ARDI sensitivity diminishes the model’s reliability. Compounding errors from measurements and experimental uncertainties are amplified, leading to larger deviations in predicted values. Although a relatively low prediction error is observed for bubbles released in the 2 .9 ppm solution, it does not reflect the model’s performance for highly surfactant-laden bubbles. The reported error is only meaningful when the surfactant concentration is known to lie within the model’s calibrated range ( ≤ 2.9 ppm). In gen-eral, for bubbles released in higher-concentration media, predictions will collapse towards the upper training limit, regardless of the true value. This loss of reliability arises from the increasingly indistinguishable shape oscillation behaviour of near-saturated bubbles, ultimately restricting the current model’s applicability to concentrations up to 2 .9 ppm. 

5. Application of Surfactant Concentration Prediction Model 

In this final section, we evaluate the predictive capability of the surfactant-concentration model by applying it to bubbles subjected to a controlled, localised surfactant perturba-tion. Using the injection apparatus described in section 2.2, a fixed volume of surfactant solution is dispensed onto a rising bubble stream at a prescribed moment after imag-ing begins. A 10 μL pulse is released at t = 1 .5 s, allowing a single or small number 19 Concentration by mass Concentration (ppm) 0.02% 6.2 0.03% 9.0 0.04% 11.7 0.05% 14.4 Table 6: Surfactant concentrations used in injection experiments 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 400.511.522.5Time (s) Predicted Surfactant Concentration (ppm) 

> control
> 6.2ppm
> 9.0ppm
> 11.7ppm
> 14.4ppm
> injection point

Figure 14: Predicted surfactant concentrations using derived ARDI mean relationship (eq. 11, with uncertainties depicted for different injected concentrations of bubbles to encounter the injected solution as it rises. The aim is to assess whether the derived model can first repeatedly identify the presence of surfactant-laden bubbles, and secondly determine the relative magnitude of contamination across different injected concentrations. Four surfactant concentrations, ranging from 0 .02% to 0 .05% by mass were injected into a stream of bubbles rising in clean tap-water environment. Their equivalent concen-trations of these injected solutions in ppm are listed in table 6. It should be emphasised that these values correspond to the concentrations inside the syringe pump. After injec-tion, the surfactant immediately mixes and dilutes within the tank. A control run with no injection was also performed. For each case, the AR profiles for bubbles observed within the 4 s imaging window were extracted and processed using the prediction model, following the same procedure detailed in section 4. The resulting predicted concentrations are presented in figure 14. The results demonstrate that the model reliably detects the onset of surfactant con-tamination. In the control case, the model consistently predicts low-level concentrations, with small variations reflecting the background presence of weak surface-active impurities in tap water. When surfactant is injected, a distinct and rapid increase in predicted con-centration occurs immediately after t = 1 .5 s. The magnitude of this spike increases with injected concentration, confirming the model’s ability to distinguish between different 20 levels of contamination. As previously discussed in figure 13, the prediction uncertainties amplifies with more heavily contaminated bubbles, which is reflected in the larger error bars for higher injected concentrations. Following the injection, bubbles in concentrations 11 .7 ppm and below return to AR 

values comparable to the control case within approximately 0 .5 s after the peak. However, for the highest injected concentration case of 14 .4 ppm, elevated predictions persist for nearly 2 s, indicating that stronger injections leave measurable residual surfactant near the needle. This residual continues to be absorbed by subsequent bubbles, delaying the system’s return to a clean state. A discrepancy naturally arises between the nominal injected concentration and the concentration predicted for the affected bubble. The immediate dilution of the injected so-lution prevents the bubble from experiencing the full syringe-pump concentration. More-over, due to the stochastic nature of bubble pinch-off and detachment, the bubble’s vertical position at the moment of injection is not perfectly controllable. This leads to some pulses being delivered after majority of the bubble of interest has already risen past the injection point. In such cases, the injection will be shared with the next bubble in the sequence, skewing the actual peak prediction magnitude for the tested injection concentration. Despite this variability, results in figure 14 demonstrate that in all trials, a bubble released within 0 .5 s of the injection event exhibits a clearly altered dynamic behaviour and can be consistently identified by the model as surfactant-laden. Overall, these results indicate that the prediction model is well suited for detect-ing localised, transient surfactant perturbations and for differentiating between relative concentration levels, even in the presence of dilution and timing variability. Its limita-tions primarily arise from experimental constraints such as imperfect synchronisation and instantaneous mixing rather than from deficiencies in the predictive framework itself. 

6. Conclusion 

The early-stage dynamics of bubbles rising in water containing varying concentrations of TX-100 surfactant (up to 5 .8 ppm) were investigated experimentally to identify quanti-tative indicators capable of predicting interfacial contamination conditions. High-speed imaging of the first 144 ms of ascent (corresponding to a rise distance of approximately 40 mm) enabled the extraction of each bubble’s instantaneous AR and u.The results reveal that u extracted at this early stage exhibits inconclusive and non-monotonic behaviour with increasing surfactant concentration within the tested range, limiting its suitability as a reliable prediction parameter. In contrast, the temporal AR 

profiles demonstrate a high sensitivity to even trace amounts of surfactant, responding rapidly to interfacial contamination. A clear damping effect on bubble shape oscillations is observable at concentrations as low as 0 .3 ppm and becomes increasingly significant with further increases in concentration up to 2 .9 ppm, when it approaches saturation. This behaviour is evident from the progressive suppression of the ellipsoidal deformation phase during ascent and is most notably quantified by the reduction in peak aspect ratio, AR peak .Further correlation analysis of the AR profiles across concentrations identified that the maximum rate of change of AR and standard deviation of AR across bubbles recorded in the same condition are also highly sensitive metrics to surfactant concentration with computed Pearson correlation coefficient magnitudes above 0.8. Our study combines these strongly correlated parameters derived from temporal AR 

measurements into a single quantitative indicator, termed ARDI , which characterises 21 the bubble’s deformation dynamics. An empirical relationship between ARDI and sur-factant concentration is established, providing a direct and practical link between mea-surable shape characteristics and the surrounding contamination level. The predictive performance of the model was assessed using bubbles from known conditions, yielding an average error of 14 .9% across more than 170 bubbles. A key limitation arises at concen-trations exceeding the calibrated upper bound of 2 .9 ppm, where prediction reliability deteriorates. The largely similar AR profiles exhibited by heavily damped bubbles in concentrations above 2 .9 ppm leads to potential inaccuracies, where predictions tend to converge toward the upper limit regardless of the true concentration. Finally, the predictive framework was applied to assess its capability in detecting and quantifying surfactant contamination from a stream of unknown bubbles. The model demonstrated strong functionality and repeatability, successfully identifying transient in-creases in surfactant concentration within 0 .5 s following the introduction of a controlled surfactant pulse. Beyond detection, the model consistently differentiated between varying contamination levels, predicting higher concentrations in response to more concentrated pulses. These results confirm the potential of the proposed approach as a rapid and sen-sitive tool for real-time monitoring of interfacial contamination in bubble-driven systems. 

References 

Ata, S. (2008). Coalescence of bubbles covered by particles. Langmuir , 24(12). Becerril, E. L., Cockx, A., and Line, A. (2002). Effect of bubble deformation on stability and mixing in bubble columns. Chem. Eng. Sci. , 57(16):3283–3297. Chabel, N. A., Vejrazka, J., Masbernat, O., and Risso, F. (2012). Shape oscillations of an oil drop rising in water: effect of surface contamination. J. Fluid Mech. , 702:533–542. Clift, R., Grace, J. R., and Weber, M. E. (1978). Bubbles, drops and particles . Academic Press, New York. Eskanlou, A., Khalesi, M., Mirmogaddam, M., Chegeni, M., and Hassas, B. (2018). Investigation of trajectory and rise velocity of loaded and bare single bubbles in flotation process using video processing technique. Sep. Sci. Technol. , 54(11):1795–1802. Evans, G. M., Doroodchi, E., Lane, G. L., Koh, P. T. L., and Schwarz, M. P. (2008). Mix-ing and gas dispersion in mineral flotation cells. Chem. Eng. Res. Des. , 86(12):1350– 1362. Fan, Y., Fang, J., and Bolotnov, I. (2021). Complex bubble deformation and break-up dynamics studies using interface capturing approach. Exp. Comp. Multiphase Flow ,3:139–151. Feng, Y., Sun, L., Mo, Z., Du, M., Zhu, C., Yang, W., and Xu, X. (2024). An evaluation of predictive correlations for the terminal rising velocity of a single bubble in quiescent clean liquid. Int. J. Multiphase Flow , 173. Hlawitschka, M. W., Kovats, P., Donmez, B., Zahringer, K., and Bart, H. J. (2022). Bubble motion and reaction in different viscous liquids. Exp. Comp. Multiphase Flow ,4:26–38. 22 J. C, C.-L. and Martinez-Bazan, C. (2016). Paths and wakes of deformable nearly spheroidal rising bubbles close to the transition to path instability. Phys. Rev. Fluids ,1:053604. Kostoglou, M., Karapantsios, T. D., and Oikonomidou, O. (2020). A critical review on turbulent collision frequency/efficiency models in flotation: unravelling the path from general coagulation to flotation. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. , 279. Kracht, W. and Finch, J. A. (2010). Effect of frother on initial bubble shape and velocity. 

Int. J. Mineral Processing , 94(3–4):115–120. Lehrer, I. H. (1976). A rational terminal velocity equation for bubbles and drops at intermediate and high reynolds numbers. J. Chem Eng.of Japan , 9:237–240. Li, Z., Song, X., Jiang, S., Yu, J., and Ishii, M. (2015). Experimental investigation on motion characteristics of relative large bubble. Nucl. Power Eng. , 36:161–164. Lindt, J. T. (1972). On the periodic nature of the drag on a rising bubble. 

Chem. Eng. Sci. , 27:1775–1781. Mart´ ın, M., Montes, F. J., and Gal´ an, M. A. (2009). Mass transfer from oscillating bubbles in bubble column reactors. Chem. Eng. J. , 151(1–3):79–88. Mesa, D. and Parada, P. R. (2018). Scale-up in froth flotation: a state-of-the-art review. 

Sep. Purif. Technol. , 210:950–962. Montes, F. J., Galan, M. A., and Cerro, R. L. (1999). Mass transfer from oscillating bubbles in bioreactors. Chem. Eng. Sci. , 54(15–16):3127–3136. Mougin, G. and Magnaudet, J. (2001). Path instability of a rising bubble. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. , 88. Mougin, G. and Magnaudet, J. (2006). Wake-induced forces and torques on a zigzagging/ spiralling bubble. J. Fluid Mech. , 567:185–194. Nalajala, V. S. and Kishore, N. (2014). Drag of contaminated bubbles in power-law fluids. 

Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Aspects , 443:240–248. Peebles, F. N. and Garber, H. J. (1953). Studies on the motion of gas bubbles in liquids. 

Chem. Eng. Prog. , 49:88–97. Tagawa, Y., Takagi, S., and Matsumoto, Y. (2014). Surfactant effect on path instability of a rising bubble. J. Fluid Mech. , 738:124–142. Tomiyama, A., Celata, G. P., Hosokawa, S., and Yoshida, S. (2002). Terminal velocity of single bubbles in surface tension force dominant regime. Int. J. Multiphase Flow ,28:1497–1519. Wang, H. and Parada, P. R. (2020). Coalescence dynamics of particle-laden bubbles. 

Langmuir , 36(19). Wang, P., Cilliers, J. J., Neethling, S. J., and Parada, P. R. (2019a). The behaviour of rising bubbles covered by particles. Chem. Eng. J. , 365:111–120. 23 Wang, P., Cilliers, J. J., Neethling, S. J., and Parada, P. R. (2019b). Effect of particle size on the rising behavior of particle-laden bubbles. Langmuir , 35(10):3680–3687. Yan, X., Jia, Y., Wang, L., and Cao, Y. (2017). Drag coefficient fluctuation prediction of a single bubble rising in water. Chem. Eng. J. , 316:553–562. Yan, X., Zheng, K., Jia, Y., Miao, Z., Wang, L., Cao, Y., and Liu, J. (2018). Drag coeffi-cient prediction of a single bubble rising in liquids. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. , 57(15):5385– 5393. Yan, X., Zheng, K., Su, W., Wang, L., Zhang, H., Cao, Y., and Guo, C. (2021). Predic-tions of terminal rising velocity, shape and drag coefficient for particle-laden bubbles. 

Minerals Eng. , 173. Zhang, L., Yang, C., and Mao, Z. S. (2008). Unsteady motion of a single bubble in highly viscous liquid and empirical correlation of drag coefficient. Chem. Eng. Sci. ,63(8):2099–2106. Zhang, Y. and Finch, J. A. (2001). A note on single bubble motion in surfactant solutions. 

J. Fluid Mech. , 429:63–66. Zheng, K., Li, C., Yan, X., Zhang, H., and Wang, L. (2019). Prediction of bubble terminal velocity in surfactant aqueous solutions. Can. J. Chem. Eng. , 98(2):607–615. 24