Title: position_paper_arxive

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.07933v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Jul 2026 00:13:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 1

# POSITION PAPER 

# Atomistic Modelin g for Electro-

# chemical Reactions 

# From the State of the Art to a Strategic Roadmap for Fu-

# ture Research within EU -CONCERT 

K. Doblhoff -Dier 1 ,* , B. Ballotta 2 , L. Bonati 3 , V. J. Bukas 4 , F. Calle -Va llejo 5 , 6 ,

C. S. Cucinotta 7 , K. S. Exner 8 , 9 , 1 0 , M. García -Melchor 6 , 1 1 , L. Giordano 1 2 , K. 

Honkala 1 3 , N. Hörmann 4 , G. Kastlunger 1 4 , M. M. Melander 1 3 , Zehra B. Öcal 1 5 ,

A. A. Reka 1 6 , S. Steinmann 1 7 , M. Vandichel 1 8 , J. -X. Zhu 1 9 , G. Cicero 2 0 1

* Corresponding Author: k.doblho6 -dier@lic.leidenuniv.nl 

Computational modeling plays a central role in 

advancing our understanding of electrochemi-

cal reactions and may thus guid e the rational 

development of sustainable energy technolo-

gies. Despite significant methodological 

progress, achieving predictive and quantita-

tively reliable simulations of electrified solid –

liquid interfaces under operando conditions re-

mains a major challenge. Recently, the 

European COST Action EU -CONCERT (EUropean 

COllaborative Network on electroCatalysis for 

Author a6iliations: 1Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, PO Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands, 2School of Physics, 

Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 3Atomistic Simulations, Italian Institute of Technology, 16145 Genova, Italy , 4Fritz -Haber -Institut der 

Max -Planck -Gesellschaft, Faradayweg 4 -6, D -14195 Berlin, Germany , 5Nano -Bio Spectroscopy Group and European Theoretical Spectros-

copy Facility (ETSF), Department of Advanced Materials and Polymers: Physics, Chemistry and Technology, University of the Bas que 

Country EHU, Avenida Tolosa 72, 20018 San Sebastián, Spain, 6IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Plaza de Euskadi 5, 48009 

Bilbao, Spain, 7Department of Chemistry and Thomas Young Centre, Imperial College London, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, London 

W12 0BZ, U.K. , 8University Duisburg Essen, Faculty of Chemistry, Theoretical Catalysis and Electrochemistry, Universitätsstraße 5, 45141 

Essen, Germany , 9Center for Nanointegration (CENIDE) Duisburg -Essen, 47057 Duisburg, Germany , 10 Cluster of Excellence RESOLV, 44801 

Bochum, Germany , 11 Center for Cooperative Research on Alternative Energy (CIC energiGUNE ), Basque Research and Technology Alliance 

(BRTA), 01510 Vitoria -Gasteiz, Spain. , 12 Department of Materials Science, University of Milano -Bicocca, 20125 Milano, Italy, 13 Department 

of Chemistry, Nanoscience Center, University of Jyväskylä, Finland 14 Department of Physics , Technical University of Denmark , Fysikvej 

307 , 2800 Lyngby , Denmark , 15 Sinop University, Faculty of Engineering and Architectury , Department of Environmental Engineering, Sinop, 

Türkiye , 16 Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics , University of Tetova , Republic of North Macedonia , 17 CNRS , ENS de Lyon, LCH, 

UMR 5182 , 69342, Lyon cedex 07, France , 18Materials and Catalysis Modelling Group, Bernal Institute, University of Limerick , 19 Theory and 

computer -aided modelling of materials in energy engineering (IET -3), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, 52425 Jülich, Germany , 20 Depart-

ment of Applied Science and Technology , Politecnico di Torino , C.so Duca degli Abruzzi 24, 10129 Torino, Italy. 

EKicient Renewable Technologies) was 

launched with the aim of advancing atomistic 

modeling of electrochemical reactions through 

systematic benchmarking and cross -validation. 

This position paper outlines the consortium ’s 

view of the current state of the art , identifies the 

priority methodological challenges to be ad-

dress ed , and defines the benchmark tests that 

are urgently needed. Th is paper should serve as 

a guide to the community and a roadmap for the 

EU -CONCERT COST Action. EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 2

Electrocatalysis is central to a number of key elec-

trochemical technologies for sustainable energy 

conversion and storage, including water electroly-

sis, CO₂ reduction, and fuel cells. The eYiciency, 

selectivity, and stability of these processes are gov-

erned by complex phenomena at electrified soli d–

liquid interfaces, where atomic -scale understand-

ing remains incomplete. 

Computational modeling plays a crucial role in ad-

vancing and widening this understanding and 

enabling knowledge -based design strategies. Alt-

hough we can currently look back at more than two 

decades of significant methodological advances, 

we still lack quantitative prediction capabilities for 

electrochemical reactions in operando. This sober-

ing assessment emerges not only from the 

complexity of electrochemical systems, but also 

from a lack of understanding of the shortcomings 

and limitations of our models an d methods .

To advance the field of computational electrocatal-

ysis , benchmarking current and future approaches 

is paramount . In response to these challenges, the 

European COST Action EU -CONCERT (EUropean 

COllaborative Network on electroCatalysis for EYi-

cient Renewable Technologies) was recently 

launched, bringing together about 250 researchers 

across Europe. The Action aims to advance atom-

istic modeling of electrochemical reactions by 

means of structured benchmarking, cross -method 

validation, and coordinated collaboratio n between 

theoretical and experimental groups. 

Through close collaboration between computa-

tional and experimental research groups , the 

consortium will identify and study well -defined and 

as -simple -as -possible model systems. Addition-

ally, collaborations between diYerent theoretical 

and computational groups will target cross -

method validation of diYerent models and simula-

tion approaches . Such coordinated interaction 

between groups (both theory -theory and theory -

experiment) is a particular stronghold of the con-

sortium and can be expected to yield new ins ights 

into the strengths and limitations of current meth-

odologies as well as to stimulate the development 

of new theoretical and computational approaches .

The principal aim s of the consortium are thus to 

provide insight into the limitations of computa-

tional methods used in the field and to address 

them . Through this bottom -up approach, we aim to 

provide well -founded and verified computational 

methods that will allow for reliable simulations of 

complex systems in the future. Addressing com-

plex, real -world problems in electrocatalysis will 

follow once these foundational methodological 

challenges have been resolved. 

In this position paper, we first describe our stand-

points regarding various atomistic simulation 

approaches relevant to a computational descrip-

tion of electrochemical reactions , then we discuss 

challenges inherent to benchmarking against ex-

periments. Finally, we summarize the state of the 

art, known limitations and challenges of various 

approaches in the appendix. 

Throughout th is position paper, we consolidate the 

viewpoints expressed during the first EU -CON-

CERT online meeting while articulating a clear 

vision for the consortium. 

# Challenges in electrochemistry 

Overall, we identify 4 main challenges in computa-

tional modeling of electrochemical reactions :

1) How do we eYectively and accurately pre-

dict and simulate electrochemical 

interfaces under operando conditions ?

2) How can we correctly account for the ef-

fect of applied potential and the resulting 

electric field in our simulations? 

3) How does the (dynamic) electrolyte aYect 

electrochemical reactions? 

4) How can we (de) couple processes occur-

ring on diYerent time - and length -scales ?

Within EU -CONCERT , it is our aim to eliminate any 

influence from point 1 as much as possible by fo-

cusing on atomically well -defined systems in both 

experiments and simulations . This way, the grand 

challenge of determining the operando interface 

structure can be postponed to a point where we EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 3

know that we can reliably describe processes at 

charged interfaces under potential control and we 

focus on challenges 2 to 4 in the following and only 

briefly summarize methods to tackle challenge 1 in 

the state of the art description in the appendix .

# Atomic -scale approaches in elec-

# trochemistry 

To address the atomic scale computational chal-

lenges in electrochemistry , various computational 

approaches are available . In the following, we 

sketch the consortium’s current position on three 

diYerent approaches that we consider particularly 

relevant in the context of our aims , namely :

1) Static DFT modeling under potential con-

trol based on implicit solvent models .

2) Simulating thermodynamic quantities and 

dynamics .

3) Machine learning interatomic potentials in 

electrochemistry .

## 1) Static DFT m odeling under potential 

## control and implicit solvent models 

A major breakthrough in atomistic simulations of 

electrochemi cal processes was triggered by the 

development of the computational hydrogen elec-

trode (CHE) referenc ing technique .1,2 This 

minimalistic approach includes the eYect of the 

applied potential a posteriori and can thus account 

for proton -coupled electron transfer (PCET) ther-

modynamics . At the same time, it ignor es local 

eYects due to the field/ capacitive charging and 

partial electron transfer at the electrochemical in-

terface that can play a role under realistic 

conditions .3 The CHE method has proven highly in-

formative in many cases ,4 is still considered a

good first approximation , and remains key for elec-

trocatalytic material s screening . However, for 

more detailed mechanistic studies, electronically 

grand canonical DFT 5–9 methods based on implicit 

solvation models are typically used . These meth-

ods are not restricted to describing PCET and allow 

for the inclusion of electric field eYects .10,11 

Nevertheless, the se methods have their own short-

comings . For example, they (i) struggle to provide a 

correct reference energy for protons in bulk solu-

tion , which is why they have sometimes been 

combined with the CHE approach 12,13 and (ii) face 

challenges 14 due to the approximative description 

of solvation ,15 leading to open questions regarding 

their reliability. This explains why, d uring the EU -

CONCERT online meeting held on January 7, 2026 ,

there was a clear call to better understand the reli-

ability and applicability of the diYerent constant 

potential models and methods available .

Implicit solvent models , as used in constant -po-

tential DFT calculations , achieve a thermodynamic 

equilibrium description of the liquid by construc-

tion. A source of concern is, however, the degree of 

reliability in this description that can be or is cur-

rently achieved . Ideally, implicit solvent models 

should correctly predict the potential of zero 

charge (PZC), the double layer capacitance profile 

in presence and absence of diYerent adsorb-

ate s/coverages , and solvation free energies . In 

practice, many common implicit solvation models 

struggle to achieve an accurate descriptio n of dou-

ble layer quantities 16 and solvation free energies 17 – 

> 19

and more involved models are often needed. 20 In 

fact, the absence of transferable solvent param-

eters for dielectric continuum models was 

identified as a main challenge for constant -poten-

tial DFT by the consortium .

To parameterize and benchmark solvation models 

for electrochemical inter faces , knowledge of the 

double layer capacitance , the PZC , and adsorbate 

solvation free energies are key . Unfortunately, 

these are diY icult to access experimentally . For in-

stance, the d ouble layer capacitance (available 

e.g., for Ag (100) 21 ) is often convoluted with adsorp-

tion events (see e.g., ref. 22 ), and s olvation free 

energies generally require an indirect approach 23 

that has only ra rely been taken and does not seem 

to allow separating electric field eYects from sol-

vent eYects for polar and charged species . Reliable 

experimental measurements of the double layer 

capacitance (with and without adsorbates) and 

solvation free energies (of neutral and charged EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 4

molecules) for a large set of electrode materials 

and structures are important to benchmark and 

develop continuum solvation models .

In addition to the parameterization of the solvation 

mo dels , the level of theory used plays a role . Inclu-

sion of beyond -mean -field eYects (as in classical 

DFT ,24,25 or density -potential functional theory 20 )

may allow for a better description of the capaci-

tance and solvation energies , but the performance 

of such models for surface solvation or adsorption 

free energies has not been systematically ad-

dressed and, to our knowledge, no such methods 

are implemented in constant -potential methods .

A straightforward approach to go beyond a mean -

field solvation is to use micro -solvation (the inclu-

sion of a few water molecules and/or ions ). Micro -

solvation can be used as a stand -alone method (if 

used in conjunction with the CHE 26 ) or in combina-

tion with implicit solvation models and constant -

potential DFT. Compared to implicit solvation 

alone, micro -solvation has the advantage to cap-

ture localized and directional interactions such as 

hydrogen bonding , which can be critical for an ac-

curate description of the reaction energetics. 

Micro -solvation models are highly portable, as they 

can easily adapt to low coordinated surface sites 

or nanoparticle s,27 and the inclusion of a few water 

molecules can lead to results similar to those ob-

tained for water bilayers on flat surfaces .28 Despite 

the se advantages of micro -solvation, a rigorous yet 

rapid way to assess the number of water molecules 

to be included in the model is lacking and consec-

utive addition is needed .26 Additionally, the lack of 

thermodynamic sampling , leading, e.g., to large 

energetic fluctuations when a hydrogen bond is 

broken is a source of concern .

To validate existing and new (implicit and explicit) 

solvation models , cross -validation remains a clear 

necessity . An example that was mentioned by the 

EU -CONCERT participants is that nonlinear dielec-

tric continuum models are now readily 

available, 8,29 but due to a lack of benchmarks 

showcasing their potential advantages, the com-

munity has been slow in adopting them. 

Furthermore, clear guidelines are fully missing as 

to when dielectric continuum models fail and sol-

vent descriptions including correlation eYects 

such as those included in RISM, 30 or QM/MM, 31 –33 

become necessary . This knowledge gap arises 

largely from the absence of systematic cross -

method comparisons designed to minimize con-

founding factors, such as diYerent initial states, 

diYerent reaction conditions, diYerent DFT setups 

and exchange -correlation functionals , etc. The de-

sign of cross -method comparisons is therefore 

also a primary target for EU -CONCERT . Unfortu-

nately, cross -method comparisons of constant -

potential simulations are often impeded by solva-

tion models only being available in specific codes. 

The Quantum Espresso solvation package ENVI-

RON 34 for example, encodes other methods than 

VASPsol, 35 VASPsol++, 29 or JDFTx 8 and the situation 

becomes even more complex when considering 

advanced solvation models such as RISM, 30,36,37 

classical DFT, 25 models based on statistical field 

theory, 38 –40 models including additional interaction 

parameters, 20,41 and QM/MM approaches. The EU -

CONCERT consortium encourage s the develop-

ment of an open -source, transferable library of 

solvation models that can be interfaced with vari-

ous codes, in analogy to libxc for exchange -

correlation functionals .42 We furthermore encour-

age developers of quantum chemistry software to 

cater towards such a development by providing the 

necessary interfaces. 

Overall , the various solvation and constant -poten-

tial schemes ( explicit electrolyte description + 

molecular dynamics , implicit solvation models ,

micro -solvation approaches , and combinations 

thereof) are all valuable as they come at diYerent 

computational cost and have diYerent strengths. A 

clear understanding of the ir limitations and risks is, 

however, important (see also the appendix). At the 

same time, we should not forget the limited accu-

racy of the underlying DFT calculations: even with 

a suitable constant -potential and solvation 

scheme, energetics obtained by DF T can easily be 

oY by 𝒪 (100 ) meV. Given the electrochemist’s fo-

cus on electrochemical issues, DFT inaccuracies 

are often taken lightly . To bring more attention to 

this issue, a section on DFT errors and their EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 5

relevance to computational electrocatalysis can 

be found in the appendix. 

## 2) Simulating thermodynamic quanti-

## ties and dynamics 

An inherent challenge in electrochemical modeling 

is the need to account for thermodynamic sam-

pling. This includes sampling of the configurations 

of a reactant, intermediate or product at the inter-

face, but also sampling of the electrolyte 

configurations responsible for the sol vation and 

the formation of the double layer. While adsorbate 

configurations can, in principle, be assessed via 

minimum hopping algorithms, the electrolyte gen-

erally needs a thermodynamic description that can 

be achieved through molec ular dynamic s (MD) 

simulations ,43 –48 though alternatives exist and have 

been used in computational electrochemistry .49 

Encouraging qualitatively correct results have been 

obtained with DFT -MD for key quanti ties , such as 

the PZC 44,50,22,51 and the inner layer capacitance .52 – 

> 54

However, quantitative diYerences to experi-

mental results can remain, which can be attributed 

to approximations in the exchange –correlation 

functional , limitations in the models (including the 

neglect of nuclear quantum eYects ),49,55 –57 and the 

short timescales considered .

In view of t he diYerent timescales for solvent reor-

ganization and ion transport , as well as the 

dimensions of a double layer and realistic inter-

face s, immense sampling eYort s are needed .

Therefore , it seems plausible that machine learn-

ing (ML) , QM/MM, and enhanced sampling 

approaches 58,59 will play an increasingly decisive 

role in computational electrochemistry to reach 

time - and length -scales unachievable with DFT -

MD . At present, and as discussed in the next sec-

tion, however, ML approaches are still 

under developed for electrochemical application s

and would benefit from better validation. To 

benchmark ML -MD approa ches, long -timescale 

(but small length scale ) DFT -MD simulations and 

post hoc DFT validation 60 seem essential . DFT -

MD should thus not be viewed as “superseded” by 

ML -MD at the present time but should be 

considered as an important validation of ML ap-

proaches . Only after establishing reliable ML -

MD approaches , will we be able to address out-

standing challenges , such as scrutiniz ing electric 

double layer models, 61 determining ion distribu-

tion s and concentration profiles .

Building on thermodynamic sampling, and going 

beyond static DFT, electrochemical modeling also 

critically depends on the evaluation of free energy 

profiles. Free energy profiles for electrochemical 

reactions obtained from DFT -MD simulations (with 

and without potential control) have become in-

creasingly available in the literature in the last few 

years. 62 –66 However, the authors ’ subjective view is 

that many results for reaction barriers obtained 

from (electrochemical) fr ee energy sampling ap-

pear scattered and occasionally diYicult to 

rationalize . It is, at present, not clear whether 

this scatter in electrochemical free -energy sam-

pling for barriers comes from human error, 

system settings , or inherent limitation s of ap-

proximations made. [Note though that there are 

clear indications for statistical limitations in some 

cases (compare e.g., ref .63 to the immense sam-

pling eYort required in ref. 67 ; or ref. 65 with the error 

bars obtained for much longer simulation times in 

ref .68 )] 

To obtain reliable results from free energy calcula-

tions , the models used in the simulation of the 

actual system dynamics also require attention . For 

instance, there is growing interest in modeling the 

charge and potential fluctuations 69 in constant po-

tential DFT -MD through ( thermo -)potentiostats 70 

but the influence of fluctuations on e.g. reaction 

barriers, solvent and reorganization dynamics, 

transport properties and autocorrelation func-

tions, and capacitance has rarely been 

addressed .71 Additionally, the results depend on 

the limitations of current (thermo -)potentiostat 

schemes , which rely on (unknown) relaxation time-

scales and , for MD s imulations , often (though not 

always 72,73 ) on hybrid explicit/implicit ap-

proach es .74 The risks and limitations of this 

approach are discussed in the appendix. EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 6

Overall, s ystematic, cross -lab benchmarking of 

electrochemical barriers and system dynamics as 

obtained via direct or enhanced sampling MD are 

needed . Such test s should include systematic var-

iation of the potential and must prove compatible 

with important thermodynamic principles. The 

complexity of the system should only be gradually 

increased (e.g., by avoiding explicit interactions of 

ions with reactants) and the scientist s involved 

should strive for agreement in terms of interpreta-

tion of the results. Th is agreement is currently 

la cking . C ommunity eKorts and cross -lab vali-

dations, as common in fields such as 

astrochemistry, are therefore much needed in the 

field of computational electrochemistry. 

## 3) Machine -learn ed interatomic poten-

## tials in electrochemistry 

The opportunities for machine learning in electro-

chemistry are vast and range from fast samp ling of 

energetics for (adsorbed) reactants, intermediates 

and products, to the acceleration of MD simula-

tions targeting solvation eYects and the structure 

of the electrochemical double layer. Each of these 

potential fields of application face s its own chal-

lenges: while the prediction of adsorbate energies 

seems primarily limited by the quality and amount 

of the input data, the quality of ML -accelerated 

simulations of the double layer seems more funda-

mentally influenced by the architectural 

assumptions of current ML interatomic potentials 

(MLIPs) - in particular their locality, their treatment 

of long -range electrostatics and the absence of ex-

plicit electronic degrees of freedom - as well as by 

the transferability of training data from DFT -MD or 

similar approaches .

To predict reaction energetics, most contemporary 

ML approaches rely on DFT data of adsorbate ener-

gies. These may be computed in gas phase or 

micro -solvation and by using standard DFT or con-

stant -potential DFT (which requires the applied 

potential as additional input). Whichever method 

is used, ML IPs will always inherit the underlying 

DFT errors present in the training set .75 

Available datasets for training ML IPs include the 

open catalyst datasets 2020, 76 2022, 77 and 2025 78 

(the latter of which includes solid -liquid interfaces 

with explicit solvent environment) , ElectroFace 79 

(solid -liquid interfaces) and BEAST DB 80,81 (grand -

canonical, constant -potential DFT data). Transfer-

ability of so -trained MLIPs to transition states and 

reaction intermediates remains, however, ques-

tionable and active learning coupled to enhanced 

sampling seems unavoidable. 82,83 

When addressing the double layer and its dynam-

ics, a fundamental issue arises from the locality 

assumption underlying most machine -learning in-

teratomic potentials, where the energy is 

decomposed into short -ranged atomic contribu-

tions. In systems of electrochemical interest –

including polar liquids, ionic materials and charged 

fragments – long -range electrostatics and collec-

tive polarization eYects play a central role, and 

purely local models may misrepresent properties 

such as charge distributions and dynamics .84 Alt-

hough message -passing schemes can be used to 

enlarge the eYective range of the in teractions (re-

ceptive field) , the correct description of the 

Coulomb interactions at the interface require s ex-

plicit modeling of long -range interactions .84 While 

dispersion interactions can often be incorporated 

through semi -empirical corrections 85 or suYi-

ciently large cutoYs, the treatment of long -range 

electrostatics and nonlocal polarization remains 

substantially more challenging. An excellent re-

cent review on the topic can be found in ref. 86 

Charge -aware neural network potentials , such as 

third -generation high -dimensional neural network 

potentials 87 or latent Ewald summation (LES) ,88,89 

as well as approaches based on the prediction of 

Wannier Centers (DPLR ),90 incorporate explicit 

long -range electrostatics and can alleviate issues 

arising from missing long -range eYects . Electro-

negativity -based schemes such as fourth -

generation neural networks ,87 similarly enable 

long -range charge redistribution. However, all 

these schemes struggle with the simultaneous de-

scription of the qualitatively diYerent long -range 

responses of the two phases at an electrochemical EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 7

interface : collective metallic screening on the solid 

side and long -range dielectric polarization and sol-

vent reorganization in the electrolyte . C apturing 

both eYects consistently within a single classical 

or machine -learning framework is challenging and 

remains an open problem . Recent approaches 91 –93 

that tackle this issue are promising, but unfortu-

nately remain ill -benchmarked, and add an 

additional layer of complexity. In short, electrocat-

alytic systems , where electron -conducting solids 

are coupled to ion -conducting liquids and charge 

flows across the interface , continue to push both 

DFT and ML IPs to their limits, motivating hybrid 

(e.g. QM/ML) or multiscale strategies that retain at 

least an implicit description of the electronic de-

grees of freedom. 

# Benchmarking against experi-

# ment 

Ultimately , only a successful comparison to exper-

imental data may validate a computational 

method. Such a comparison must go beyond the 

use of scaling relations and descriptor -based ap-

proaches : although highly successful for 

rationalizing catalytic trends, these approaches do 

not always translate into quantitative agreement 

with experimental performance .94 –96 Therefore, i n

the context of computational electrocatalysis, the 

direct comparison between predicted and 

measured capacitance, free energies, reaction 

rates and equilibrium potentials for ad -/de sorp-

tion are central .

The advantage of benchmarking against reaction 

rates is that these are reasonably straightforward 

to measure compared to double layer capaci-

tances (which are often convoluted with 

adsorption capacitances) , the potential of zero 

free charge (which may not even be accessible for 

a surface with a particular adsorbate coverage and 

is a somewhat ill -defined quantity in systems in 

which ions can partially transfer their charge ), ion 

distributions (the detection of which requires X -ray 

techniques) , or (solvation) free energies or 

entrop ies (which are hard to assess experimen-

tally ). The disadvantage of benchmark s against 

reaction rates , rate constants, and adsorption 

equilibria is that (i) small changes in Δ𝐺 ‡ culminate 

in large changes in the reaction rate due to the un-

derlying exponential relation and (ii) the simulation 

of reaction rates may require the consideration of 

the full reaction network and mass transport ef-

fects . To simplify matters, one may consider trends 

rather than absolute values, or exploit pH and ki-

netic isotope eYects which can probe the rate -

determining step along complex pathways. 97 Alter-

natively, one can try to exploit an automated 

exploration of reaction networks, as already estab-

lished in fields such as combustion and 

astrochemistry. These approaches reduce bias in 

mechanism selection and enable the identification 

of competing pathways that may otherwise be 

overlooked. R ecent developments extend these 

concepts to catalytic and surface systems, allow-

ing for the construction of large reaction networks 

and associated microkinetic models .98,99 Applica-

tion to electrochemical interfaces remains 

challenging , however, owing to the large configura-

tional space, the presence of solvent and 

electrolyte , and the dynamic nature of the surface ,

an exploitation of ML –based approaches seems 

unavoidable .100 –103 

In any case , a successful experiment –simulation 

comparison must consider the electrochemical 

operando conditions , including surface structure, 

defect concentration, but also mass transport, (lo-

cal ) pH , as well as impurities in the cell. Capturing 

these conditions is inherently complex. It is there-

for e a major eYort for the experimentalists involved 

in EU -CONCERT to select systems that are highly 

controll able or well defined in terms of surface 

structure, defect concentration, mass transport, 

pH , and impuri ties in the electrolyte. It is the vision 

of EU -CONCERT that well -controll able or well -de-

fined systems should be analyzed via cross -lab 

validation and results be compared for repro-

ducibility before aiming for an experiment –

theory comparison .EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 8

# Conclusion 

Overall, in this position paper, we have not only 

highlighted the target points of the theory 

workgroup of the COST -Action EU -CONCERT, but 

have also charted methods in computational elec-

trochemistry, and summarized the state of the art 

and critical limitations. We hope to inspire compu-

tational electrochemists to work on the highlighted 

challenges and, in particular, to seek close interac-

tion with other computational, experimental, and 

theor etical groups, allowing for benchmarking and 

cross -validation. The C OST -Action EU -CONCERT 

(https://eu -concert.eu ) provide s a key platform for 

doing so . In line with the inclusiveness objectives 

of COST, the Action also oYers valuable opportuni-

ties for Young Researchers and Innovators (YRIs) 

and researchers from Inclusiveness Target Coun-

tries (ITCs) to establish international 

collaborations, gain visibility within the commu-

nity, and actively contribute to shaping the future of 

computational electrochemistry. We warmly en-

courage p rospective members to apply through the 

COST -Action application form 

(https://www.cost.eu/actions/CA24103/) .

# Acknowledgements 

This article is based upon work from COST Action 

EU -CONCERT , supported by COST (European Co-

operation in Science and Technology). The authors 

acknowledge helpful discussions with many of the 

EU -CONCERT members . Several members, as 

listed in the Supporting Information, have en-

dorsed the paper. Large language models have 

been used to improve the phrasing on th e sentence 

level and on the level of sentence coherence. All 

test improvements suggest ed by large language 

models were critically evaluated. 

# Appendix 

## State of the art, known limitations and 

## challenges in electrochemical model-

## ing 

The following “state of the art” reflects, to a certain 

extent, the opinion of the authors , informed 

through the participants of the first online meeting 

of the COST Action EU -CONCERT. 

## 1) Static DFT modeling under poten-

## tial control and (implicit ) solvation 

## models 

We focus here on static DFT calculations that 

achieve potential control via implicit solvation 

models. For other electrification s chemes, we refer 

to a recent review , ref. 69 

State of the art: 

For interface calculations, t ypical system sizes 

consider two -dimensional periodic slabs consist-

ing of below 40 surface atoms and 2 -5 subsurface 

layers. The relevance of defect sites and defective 

surfaces is increasingly recognized and evaluating 

them is considered good practice. As exchange -

correlation functional, mostly PBE, 108 RPBE 109 or 

BEEF -vdW 110 are used, where the first is the overall 

most applied exchange -correlation functional for 

solids, RPBE provides accurate O, CO and NO ad-

sorption energies on selected transition metals, 

and BEEF -vdW was fitted, amongst other things, to 

some adsorption ener gies. 

In the following, we discuss diYerent techniques 

typically used in computational electroc atalysis ,

including the computational hydrogen electrode 

approach, constant potential DFT, and micro -solv-

ation. Finally, we also discuss the limitations of 

DFT as typically used in computational electroca-

talysis. 

• The Computational hydrogen electrode 

method , though often considered “old 

school” , still has relevant applications in com-

putational electrochemistry. In particular, it is EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 9

- Still considered state of the art for elec-

trocatalyst design and selection via 

(high -throughput) materials screening 

- A relevant ingredient when modeling re-

action networks, 104,105 as constant -

potential DFT methods are (currently) in-

capable of accurately describing protons 

in a bulk -like environment .

Known limitation s:

- Only applicable to PCET thermodynam-

ics or, more generally, processes 

describable through closed thermody-

namic cycles analogous to Born –Haber 

constructions . i.e., no partial electron 

transfer is possible. Therefore , it is also 

o Unable to describe , non -Nernstian 

eYects/non -integer potential re-

sponse 106 

o Not intended for the direct calcula-

tion of electrochemical reaction 

barriers. 

- Limitations stemming from the ex-

change -correlation functional (see 

below for details) .

• Constant -potential DFT or values corrected 

to a certain potential via a post processing 

correction 107 for barrier and mechanistic 

studies .

Most constant -potential DFT approaches rely 

on implicit linear dielectric continuum solva-

tion models , which can diYer quite widely in 

flavor and parameterizations. Widely used im-

plementations are available via 

- ENVIRON 34 (Quantum Espresso) 

- VASP sol 35,112 and VAS Psol++ 29 (where 

VASP sol++ is largely considered to su-

persede VASP sol due to its enhanced 

stability and the availability of nonlinear 

models and solvent -aware implementa-

tions) 

- JDFT x8

- GPAW/SJM 7

Known limitation s:

- Possibly incorrect representation of the 

capacitance, leading to an incorrect re-

lationship between potential and 

surface electric field , possibly impacting 

energetics. This o riginates (mostly) from 

the solvent model. 

- Likely incorrect representation of the po-

tential profile , o riginat ing (mostly) from 

the solvent model. 

- Limitations stemming from the ex-

change -correlation functional (see 

below for details) 

- Incorrect surface solvation energy 

- Correctly describing the initial/final state 

for charged reactants/products is close 

to impossible as this would require bring-

ing the charged species into the bulk of 

the electrolyte, which is (a) typically not 

done (often the particle is only brought to 

the reaction plane) and (b) requires an 

accurate description of solvation for 

charged species as otherwise the overall 

reaction energetics will be impacted. 

Un quantified risks: 

- Static DFT models are (in conjunction 

with transition -state searches) also of-

te n used to extract kinetic information. 

There is some debate on whether con-

stant potential or constant charge 

ensembles provide a more realistic rep-

resentation when describing dynamic 

events .113 We argue that in many situa-

tions equilibrium conditions are 

suYicient and transition -state theory is 

valid. 114,115 Under equilibrium conditions, 

in the infinite system size limit, both ap-

proaches are thermodynamically 

equivalent .116,117 EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 10 

Required improvements: 

- High -quality solvation models, ideally, 

with transferrable parameterizations 

specific to solid -liquid interfaces. 

• Micro -solvation 

Micro -solvation includes local solvation ef-

fects in static calculations with a limited 

computational cost. Examples include solva-

tion of oxygenates on metal 

nanoparticles ,27,118 carbon -based , and nitro-

gen -based intermediates on metallic 

surfaces .119,120 

Known limitations: 

- Dependence of the results on the num-

ber of water molecules included in the 

model .

- Due to the fluxional nature of water clus-

ters , a n increasing number of almost 

isoenergetic local minima may be found 

as more water molecules are included .28 

As a result, a single minimum might not 

be representative of the solvation struc-

ture. 

Un quantified risks: 

- Inaccurate solvation energetics may 

arise from insuYicient sampling of water 

configurations , leading to an incorrect 

description of enthalpic and entropic 

contributions. 

Alternatively to performing calculations di-

rectly at constant potential, post -processing 

schemes can also be used. Constant poten-

tial DFT 5–8 and post -processing corrections 

based on the capacitance and work function 

change 107 are often considered thermody-

namically equivalent. In practice, however, 

diYerences arise a) due to the approxima-

tions needed in both frameworks, and b) also 

from the varying geometries obtained under 

constant -charge and constant -potential 

conditions. 111 Constant -potential DFT is of-

ten conceived as easier to use. 

• Exchange -correlation functionals 

While sophisticated exchange -correlation 

functionals are available for specific applica-

tions, the situation remains diYicult whenever 

metal surfaces and molecules need to be well 

described simultaneously 121,122 or when com-

putational cost plays a crucial role .

The three most widely used exchange -corre-

lation functionals in catalysis are arguably 

PBE, 108 RPBE, 109 and BEEF -vdW. 110 They are 

massively used because of their cost -eYec-

tiveness and because PBE and RPBE, as 

general purpose functionals, can be expected 

to show somewhat acceptable accuracy over 

a wide range of systems . While researchers 

are often familiar with the limited accuracy of 

DFT, a comprehensive error assessment is not 

yet a standard procedure in electrochemistry 

and benchmarks for molecule –surface inter-

actions are mostly limited to a couple of 

adsorption energies 110,123 –126 and even fewer 

reaction barrier heights .121,122,127 –129 Most 

benchmarks are done for molecules and 

mostly assess average performance of func-

tionals .130 With respect to electrochemistry, 

to date, the most widely known error is that of 

O2, which is routinely corrected in oxygen evo-

lution and reduction modelling. 1

Known limitations: 

- Using GGA (such as PBE, RPBE and 

BEEF -vd W), meta -GGA and even hybrid 

functionals involves large errors for the 

thermochemistry of numerous gas -

phase molecules and ions. 75,131 However, 

the errors appear to be systematic and 

can be corrected via descriptor -based 

analyses or using automated proce-

dures. 75,132 

- Gas -phase errors have direct impact on 

calculated reaction energies, equilib-

rium potentials and free -energy EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 11 

diagrams ,75,133 surface and bulk Pourbaix 

diagrams, 131,134 and volcano plots .135 

Unquantified risks: 

- The DFT errors in adsorption energies are 

a convolution of molecular and solid -

state errors , which both may be influ-

enced by the molecule adsorb ing .136,137 

To quantify them, abundant experi-

mental adsorption energies are needed, 

that go beyond the currently available 

databases .110 Recent joint computa-

tional -experimental approaches have 

started to address this matter, 138,139 but 

considerably more work is necessary 

and protocols should definitely be estab-

lished. 

- While the field of electrochemistry turns 

more to the determination of barriers, 

the large DFT errors 121,122,129 that can be 

incurred – at least for barriers of dissoci-

ative adsorption reactions – are often 

ignored. Benchmarking reaction barriers 

is arduous ,140 and in electrochemistry it 

is often convoluted with other diYiculties 

related to the applied potential and elec-

tric field profile as discussed above. 

## 2) Simulating thermodynamic quanti-

## ties and dynamics 

State of the art: 

• Ab initio molecular dynamics 

Typical system sizes and length scales con-

sider slabs of up to ~(6 × 6) surface -atom 

supercells (for metals; equivalent system 

sizes are used for oxides) and a several tens to 

a few hundred water molecules . C onsiderably 

smaller system sizes surface supercells (e.g., 

3 × 3) are often still used though, in particular 

for thermodynamic integration of reaction 

processes . Simulation times are typically in 

the order of 10 to ~100 ps. 43,141,142 

Charging is typically achieved by adding ions 

of one type 52,143 or , more generally, via an 

imbalance 144 between positive and negative 

ions in the electrolyte. Alternatively , DFT -MD 

simulations can also be coupled to mean -

field solvation models to achieve potential 

control .30,74,145 Such schemes will, however, 

bear risks /limitations as they (i) always de-

scribe the mean -field part of the solution in 

equilibrium , (ii) do not allow for (further) ions 

to penetrate the explicit electrolyte region and 

therefore likely do not reproduce the correct 

potential profile, and ( iii) can show computa-

tional intricacies (see below). Finally, s everal 

other charging/electrification s ch emes have 

been suggested and used in literature , which 

we will not detail here (e.g., refs. 36,146 –150 ). We

refer interested reader s to a recent review 69 

that, with the exception of refs. ,146,147 reviews 

these and other methods. 

Known limitations: 

- Small system size can lead to art ifacts in 

the (liquid ) structure of aqueous electro-

lytes and will limit the extent of the 

double layer to length scales typical of 

the inner layer. 

- Limited tim e and length scales restrict 

achievable sampling eYiciency and con-

vergence. In particular , ion -density and 

free -energy profiles can be expected to 

be diYicult to converge , and the use of 

enhanced sampling methods is essen-

tial. Yet, even with enhanced sampling, 

depending on the exact system and the 

enhanced sampling setup, considerable 

error bars may remain – even for time-

scales achievable only with ML -MD 

(compare Ref. 68 and Ref. 151 ). 

- Unknown bulk ion concentration, as 

“bulk” conditions cannot be achieved (at 

least not for ionic strengths <1 M) in the 

limited system sizes considered. 

- Experiments fix the electrolyte activity 

and replicating this would require DFT -

MD in the grand canonical ensemble for 

the ions and solvent. (Electronically EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 12 

grand -canonical approaches do not ac-

count for this) .

- Treatment of charge/potential fluctua-

tions and their influence on system 

dynamics. Systematic studies on the in-

fluence of these charge/potential 

fluctuations with respect to simulation 

cell size are needed. 71 

- Including nuclear quantum eYects is 

challenging .152 

- Unquantified potential eYect of charge 

delocalization resulting from the use of 

GGA functionals .

For coupled DFT -MD – implicit solvation: 

- Risk of penetration of the mean -field sol-

vent into the explicit solvent region; 

diYiculty of generating a “true” interface. 

- At the implicit/explicit boundary, an (un-

physical) potential drop can occur, 

limiting the meaningfulness of the value 

of the applied potential. 

- Charged species cannot rigorously be 

brought into the “bulk” during free energy 

integrations (at least not when kept in the 

explicit region). 

- For limited system sizes, neither con-

stant potential, nor constant charge 

implementations will capture the correct 

charge and potential fluctuations that 

should occur in the electrolyte region 

close to the interface . Thermo -potenti-

ostats 70 alleviate this to a certain extent 

but require the choice of a relaxation 

time . Additionally, today’s approaches 

are limited to a single (dominant) relaxa-

tion process/time constant . The 

influence of these fluctuations is largely 

uncharted today. 

- The implicit solvent will always remain in 

equilibrium , even if a (fast) reaction oc-

curs (in the explicit region ). While this 

can be simulated by describing the full 

reaction dynamics in a fully ab initio de-

scription, simulations that are coupled 

to a potentiostat will not correctly de-

scribe the state of the electrolyt e.

Thermo -potentiostats 70 can drive the 

system back into equilibrium, but (i) will 

suYer from the same limitations as men-

tioned above , and (ii) will not necessarily 

correctly capture the dynamic response 

of the system. We note that, in many 

cases, a non -equilibrium description will 

not be required. 114,115 

## 3) Machine -learn ed (ML) intera tomic 

## potentials for electrochemistry 

State of the art: 

a) Use of oK -the -shelf ML interaction poten-

tial s (MLIP s)

A broad range of MLIPs seems to be used by 

the community, including ACE, MACE , DEEP -

MD, NEQUIP and many more . In the c urrent 

state of the art , oY -the -shelf MLIPs are mostly 

used to extend timescales (or sampling) while 

keeping system sizes that are similar to those 

used in DFT -MD simulations . This is not a n in-

herent limitation though (see e.g., ref s.92,153 ).

When increasing the unit cell size, care should 

be taken , though , that relevant long -range ef-

fects are still adequate ly accounted for in the 

production runs (see below) . In this regard, we 

expect models that make use of explicit Cou-

lomb interactions or nonlocal desc riptors 

(see sections (d) and (e) below ) to show com-

parative advantages .

OY-the -shelf MLIP frameworks , which typi-

cally do not account for explicit Coulomb 

interactions, charges or applied potential, can 

still be trained at a particular applied potential 

(or electric field) . This can be achieved by 

training on data obtained via a mixed ex-

plicit /implicit solvation s cheme or by charging 

via a homogeneous background .153 Alterna-

tively , the MLIP can be trained on fully ab initio EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 13 

data with an ion imbalance in the electrolyte ,

which also allows one to control the surface 

charge. In the latter case, t raining can even be 

performed for a mixture of surface charges .

However, a s shown and discussed in ref. 84 ,

training at a given surface charge seems pre-

ferrable for typical system setups used today. 

To eYiciently train multiple MLIPs correspond-

ing to diYerent charge values, transfer 

learning may allow considerable learning 

speedup. 154 

Known limitations: 

- Missing long -range interactions (e.g., 

Coulomb interactions; van der Waals in-

teractions) beyond the cutoY 

radius/receptive field .

- Lack of databases for solvated and elec-

trified interfaces .

Un quantified risks: 

- Inaccuracies in the models obtained can 

be hard to detect. Root mean -square er-

rors for a test set are often insuYicient to 

detect possible issues. (This holds for all 

MLIP -types discussed in the following) 

- Possibly wrong /compromised learning 

due to the lack of Coulomb interaction s

as important physical eYect s.

- The missing/incorrect description of the 

eYect of electric fields caused by spe-

cies outside the cutoY radius/ receptive 

radius. 

In a ddition to these limitations and risks that 

pertain to the MLIPs themselves, many limita-

tions and risks named above for DFT and DFT -

MD calculations in electrochemistry transfer 

to the MLIPs through the training schemes. 

However , due to the significant speed -up and 

the (hopefully relatively limited) training data, 

other problems (e.g., limited timescales, lim-

ited system size , and use of GGA functionals 

in DFT) can potentially be avoided when using 

MLIPs .

b) MLIPs using the potential or surface charge 

as additional input during learning and pre-

dicting 

When trained via implicit electrolytes, the sur-

face charge 49,68,155 (or potential 156,157 ) can be 

used as an additional descriptor. This allows 

the MLIP to learn predictions for varying sur-

face charges (potentials) . (Electronically 

grand -canonical) energies can then either be 

predicted directly, 68,155 or via an expansion of 

the energy and the knowledge of the (potential 

dependent) local charges predicted from an 

MLIP. 156 If the surface charge is used as an ad-

ditional descriptor for constant -potential 

descriptions, the work function or the chemi-

cal potential of electrons Φ = "# 

> "$

, where 𝐸 is 

the (free) energy and 𝑄 the free charge , must 

also be predicted via the MLIP. 

Known limitations: 

- Due to the rotational symmetry of the de-

scriptors typically used , this approach is 

expected to break down if species reside 

outside the receptive field of the surface, 

as t hey should lose the “ sense of direc-

tion”. This is related to the limitations and 

risks listed for the oY -the -shelf MLIPs. 

One may expect these models to work 

best for interfaces without explicit sol-

vent or with a limited amount of explicit 

solvent .

- Similarly, if charged species reside out-

side of the receptive field of the metal ,

charge predictions for the metal atoms 

can be expected to be unreliable. This 

again suggests that these models are 

most suited in circumstances where the 

amount of explicit solvation is rather lim-

ited. 

- Additionally, the missing long -range in-

teractions will limit predictability for 

systems in which long -range eYects in 

the bulk are relevant. EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 14 

- One can expect that the approach 

should break down for in homogeneous 

systems where, e.g., two surfaces with 

diYerent PZC are mixed. 

c) MLIPs trained at one potential but allowing 

predictions at other potentials through first 

or second order corrections 

While most MLIPs must be trained explicitly at 

the potential desired, the r esponse analysis 

in 𝑧 -orientation (RAZOR) model 158 makes use 

of a second -order expansion to predict ener-

gies outside the training range (i.e., away from 

an applied surface charge 𝑄 %). This is 

achieved through a charge + local -descriptor -

based prediction of “local” contributions to 

the dipole polarization along the surface nor-

mal and the first derivatives of the atomic 

forces with respect to the applied surface 

charge. Similar learning and interpolation ad-

vantages likely hold true for ref. ,156 which uses 

a related approach, but starting from the elec-

tronically grand -canonical energy. 

Known limitations: 

- Same as for (b) 

Risks: 

- The concept of “local” contributions to 

the polarization may break down in the 

presence of ions. Further testing of the 

approach for such applications is 

needed. 

d) ML IPs including explicit Coulomb interac-

tions 

MLIPs can be made charge -aware by predict-

ing charges 68 of the constituents or the 

location of Wannier centroids 90 based on the 

local environment . These charges can then be 

used to compute Coulombic interactions ex-

plicitly. 

At metal interfaces, however, the charge is not 

necessarily defined by the local environment. 

To overcome this problem, ec -MLP 91 was 

developed, which combines the prediction of 

Wannier cent roids from the local environment 

(eYectively capturing charge and short -range 

polarization) with a Siepmann -Sprik -type 159 

response of the metal electrode. The same 

approach has recently been used to couple 

metallic response to latent Ewald summation 

(LES) 93 and a charge -aware approach based 

on Bader -basin -centroids .92 The advantage of 

these approaches is that they allow fluctuat-

ing charges on each atom and thereby should, 

e.g., enable the discharge of an ion upon ad-

sorption. 

Known limitations: 

- Although constant -potential simulations 

are possible through the two -electrode 

setup, one should not forget that the s im-

ulations are still inherently canonical in 

the atomic/ionic species. Also, with two 

electrodes, it may be diYicult to fix the 

(absolute) potential of the “working” 

electrode against a reference electrode 

and not just the potential between refer-

ence and counter electrodes. 

- Due to the specific Wannier centroid ap-

proach used , ec -MLP 91 is restricted to 

constant (total) per -atom charges. This is 

not a fundamental issue, however. 

Un quantified risks: 

- Unknown reliability of the Siepmann -

Sprik -type description of the metallic re-

sponse. 

- Sensitivity of the results to the underlying 

model parameters in the Siepmann -

Sprik model. 

- The description of nuclear and electronic 

charges as localized may prove insuYi-

cient. 

- The transfer of charge from the electro-

lyte (well localizable via Wannier 

approaches) to the metal may prove 

challeng ing for these methods. EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 15 

e) MLIPs that use attention to account for 

long -range interactions 

To introduce long -range interactions, so -

called attention schemes have also been pro-

posed. This is implemented, for example in 

SpookyNet .160 In principle, this concept can 

be combined with an explicit description of 

Coulomb interactions through the prediction 

of (long -range aware) atomic charges. 68 

## 4) Reaction networks , mass 

## transport, and reaction kinetics 

State of the art: 

• Reaction networks constructed based on 

chemical insight 

• Inclusion of potential and pH eYects based on 

constant -potential DFT 

• Mainly in fields other than electrochemistry: 

Automated exploration of reaction mecha-

nisms. 98 –100,100 –102 

• If m ass transport plays a role, it should be 

coupled to the reaction kinetics, as often 

done in literature. 161 Mass transport can be 

captured via analytical approximations , as 

done in ref. ,161 or through numerical simula-

tions based on the Poisson -Nernst -Planck 

equations. 162 

Known limitations: 

- Oversimplified surfaces (e.g., single -crystal-

line) ; limited configurational sampling 

- Solvent eYects often treated approximately 

- Potential and pH eYects often treated approx-

imately; e.g., Butler -Volmer -type kinetics with 

constant transfer coeYicient s are often em-

ployed and local electrochemical activity of 

species is obtained through simplified mass -

transport equations .

Risks :

- An accurate treatment of mass transport 

must include buYering eYects and can 

depend sensitively on the exact parameteriza-

tion. 163 

- Hidden pathway bias when relying on hand -

built reaction networks 

- Misidentification of the operando structure; 

“overlooking” active sites 

- Overlooking mass -transport eYects. 

## 5) Assessing operando structures 

Real electrochemical surfaces and interfaces 

rarely resemble ideal single -crystal surfaces: they 

undergo reconstruction, dissolution, oxidation, re-

duction, facet evolution, defect formation, and 

dynamic restructuring under applied potential – a

process that can even depend on the operando 

electrolyte environment (including local electro-

chemical activity of protons) .164 –166 Often the 

relevant catalyst surface is “guessed” based on ex-

perimental insight. Modern computational 

approaches aim to determine the relevant active 

catalyst surface via (surface) Pourbaix dia-

grams 167,168 and consider complexities such as the 

active site distribution . However, a catalyst is gen-

erally not at thermodynamic equilibrium , and 

cycling history and mass transport can play a role .

In the past, out -of -equilibrium DFT -MD simulations 

have been used to rationalize dissolution pro-

cesses 169 and very recently, large -scale MD 

simulations based on MLIPs have been exploited to 

unravel electrode restructuring. 170,171 While these 

simulations have proven insightful, they only cover 

a small part of the picture .

Overall, we see a need for data -driven approaches 

towards identifying active site distributions and 

catalyst reconstruction .172,173 Besides, clearer ef-

fort s towards understanding the eYect of diYerent 

active sites on catalysis are needed. 174 

State of the art: 

• Consideration of operando catalyst structure 

based on insight from experiment. 

• Computational Pourbaix diagrams :175,176 Sur-

face and bulk Pourbaix analyses provide 

thermodynamic stability maps under EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 16 

electrochemical conditions and help identify 

relevant surface terminations, 177 including ox-

ides, hydroxides, 178 and hydrides, 171,179 

together with subsurface structures .180 These 

approaches have been applied to various cat-

alytic su bstrates including metals, oxides, 2D 

materials, and nanostructures. 181 

Known limitations: 

- Neglect dynamic phenomena and ki-

netic barriers 

- When considering (surface) Pourbaix di-

agrams, mass transport limitations 

aYecting the local electrochemical ac-

tivity of protons are generally 

neglected, 168 potentially leading to an in-

correct prediction of the surface state. 164 

- Surface Pourbaix diagrams often neglect 

surface heterogeneity and are not gener-

ally devised to predict surface 

reconstruction , which is important to en-

hance catalyst durability 182,183 

- Results often depend crucially on the ex-

change -correlation functional leading to 

some phases not being visible or of ap-

preciably diYerent sizes in the potential 

vs pH plane .131,134 

- Joint experimental and computational 

studies have shown that surface Pour-

baix diagrams might only be a fair 

starting point to elucidate the actual, 

more complex structure and degradation 

pathways of electrocatalysts under reac-

tion conditions. 182,183 A feedback loop 

between theory and experiments is 

highly recommended in this area. 

# References 

1. Nørskov, J. K. et al. Origin of the Overpotential 

for Oxygen Reduction at a Fuel -Cell Cathode. 

J. Phys. Chem. B 108 , 17886 –17892 (2004). 

2. Anderson, A. B. Perspective on theories for re-

versible potentials for reactions taking place 

on electrode surfaces. J. Electroanal. Chem. 

898 , 115623 (2021). 

3. Moradi, K. & Melander, M. M. Electronic struc-

ture methods for simulating the applied 

potential in semiconductor electrochemistry. 

Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 49 , 101615 (2025). 

4. Combining theory and experiment in electro-

catalysis: Insights into materials design. 

Science https://www.sci-

ence.org/doi/10.1126/science.aad4998. 

5. Letchworth -Weaver, K. & Arias, T. A. Joint den-

sity functional theory of the electrode -

electrolyte interface: Application to fixed elec-

trode potentials, interfacial capacitances, and 

potentials of zero charge. Phys. Rev. B 86 ,

075140 (2012). 

6. Melander, M. M., Kuisma, M. J., Christensen, T. 

E. K. & Honkala, K. Grand -canonical approach 

to density functional theory of electrocatalytic 

systems: Thermodynamics of solid -liquid in-

terfaces at constant ion and electrode 

potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 150 , 041706 (2018). 

7. Kastlunger, G., Lindgren, P. & Peterson, A. A. 

Controlled -Potential Simulation of Elementary 

Electrochemical Reactions: Proton Discharge EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 17 

on Metal Surfaces. J. Phys. Chem. C 122 ,

12771 –12781 (2018). 

8. Sundararaman, R. et al. JDFTx: Software for 

joint density -functional theory. SoftwareX 6,

278 –284 (2017). 

9. Hörmann, N. G., Andreussi, O. & Marzari, N. 

Grand canonical simulations of electrochemi-

cal interfaces in implicit solvation models. J. 

Chem. Phys. 150 , 041730 (2019). 

10. Ringe, S., Hörmann, N. G., Oberhofer, H. & 

Reuter, K. Implicit Solvation Methods for Ca-

talysis at Electrified Interfaces. Chem. Rev. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c0067 

5 (2021) doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00675. 

11. Smith, M. M., Treps, L., Melander, M. M., Apaja, 

V. & Honkala, K. DFT -Based Multiscale Model-

ing of Heterogeneous (Electro)Catalytic 

Reactions. ACS Catal. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.5c07967 

(2026) doi:10.1021/acscatal.5c07967. 

12. Lindgren, P., Kastlunger, G. & Peterson, A. A. 

Electrochemistry from the atomic scale, in the 

electronically grand -canonical ensemble. J. 

Chem. Phys. 157 , 180902 (2022). 

13. Ge, A. et al. On the Coupling of Electron Trans-

fer to Proton Transfer at Electrified Interfaces. 

J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.0c03472 (2020) 

doi:10.1021/jacs.0c03472. 

14. Gauthier, J. A. et al. Challenges in Modeling 

Electrochemical Reaction Energetics with Po-

larizable Continuum Models. ACS Catal. 920 –

931 (2018) doi:10.1021/acscatal.8b02793. 

15. Gauthier, J. A. et al. Unified Approach to Im-

plicit and Explicit Solvent Simulations of 

Electrochemical Reaction Energetics. J. 

Chem. Theory Comput. 15 , 6895 –6906 (2019). 

16. Sundararaman, R., Letchworth -Weaver, K. & 

Schwarz, K. A. Improving accuracy of electro-

chemical capacitance and solvation 

energetics in first -principles calculations. J. 

Chem. Phys. 148 , 144105 (2018). 

17. Understanding Adsorption of Organics on 

Pt(111) in the Aqueous Phase: Insights from 

DFT Based Implicit Solvent and Statistical 

Thermodynamics Models. J. Chem. Theory 

Comput. 

https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/acs.jctc 

.1c00894 (2022). 

18. Zhang, X., DeFever, R. S., Sarupria, S. & Get-

man, R. B. Free Energies of Catalytic Species 

Adsorbed to Pt(111) Surfaces under Liquid 

Solvent Calculated Using Classical and EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 18 

Quantum Approaches. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 

59 , 2190 –2198 (2019). 

19. Clabaut, P., Schweitzer, B., Götz, A. W., 

Michel, C. & Steinmann, S. N. Solvation Free 

Energies and Adsorption Energies at the 

Metal/Water Interface from Hybrid Quantum -

Mechanical/Molecular Mechanics Simula-

tions. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.0c00632 

(2020) doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.0c00632. 

20. Huang, J. Density -Potential Functional Theory 

of Electrochemical Double Layers: Calibration 

on the Ag(111) -KPF6 System and Parametric 

Analysis. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 19 , 1003 –

1013 (2023). 

21. Valette, G. Double layer on silver single crystal 

electrodes in contact with electrolytes having 

anions which are slightly specifically ad-

sorbed: Part II. The (100) face. J. Electroanal. 

Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 138 , 37 –54 

(1982). 

22. Fröhlich, N. L. et al. A comprehensive model 

for the electric double layer of stepped plati-

num electrodes. Nat. Chem. 1–8 (2026) 

doi:10.1038/s41557 -025 -02063 -9. 

23. Singh, N. & Campbell, C. T. A Simple Bond -Ad-

ditivity Model Explains Large Decreases in 

Heats of Adsorption in Solvents Versus Gas 

Phase: A Case Study with Phenol on Pt(111) in 

Water. ACS Catal. 9, 8116 –8127 (2019). 

24. Wu, J. Understanding the Electric Double -

Layer Structure, Capacitance, and Charging 

Dynamics. Chem. Rev. 122 , 10821 –10859 

(2022). 

25. Wang, X., Liu, K. & Wu, J. Demystifying the 

Stern layer at a metal –electrolyte interface: 

Local dielectric constant, specific ion adsorp-

tion, and partial charge transfer. J. Chem. 

Phys. 154 , 124701 (2021). 

26. Rendón -Calle, A., Builes, S. & Calle -Vallejo, F. 

Substantial improvement of electrocatalytic 

predictions by systematic assessment of sol-

vent eYects on adsorption energies. Appl. 

Catal. B Environ. 276 , 119147 (2020). 

27. Calle -Vallejo, F., F. de Morais, R., Illas, F., 

LoYreda, D. & Sautet, P. AYordable Estimation 

of Solvation Contributions to the Adsorption 

Energies of Oxygenates on Metal Nanoparti-

cles. J. Phys. Chem. C 123 , 5578 –5582 (2019). 

28. Di Liberto, G. & Giordano, L. Role of solvation 

model on the stability of oxygenates on 

Pt(111): A comparison between microsolva-

tion, extended bilayer, and extended EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 19 

metal/water interface. Electrochem. Sci. Adv. 

4, e2100204 (2024). 

29. Islam, S. M. R., Khezeli, F., Ringe, S. &

Plaisance, C. An implicit electrolyte model for 

plane wave density functional theory exhibit-

ing nonlinear response and a nonlocal cavity 

definition. J. Chem. Phys. 159 , 234117 (2023). 

30. Haruyama, J., Ikeshoji, T. & Otani, M. Electrode 

potential from density functional theory calcu-

lations combined with implicit solvation 

theory. Phys. Rev. Mater. 2, 095801 (2018). 

31. Shin, S. -J. et al. A unifying mechanism for cat-

ion eYect modulating C1 and C2 productions 

from CO2 electroreduction. Nat. Commun. 

13 , 5482 (2022). 

32. Abidi, N. & Steinmann, S. N. An Electrostati-

cally Embedded QM/MM Scheme for 

Electrified Interfaces. ACS Appl. Mater. Inter-

faces 15 , 25009 –25017 (2023). 

33. Chen, X. et al. Density -Functionalized QM/MM 

Delivers Chemical Accuracy For Solvated Sys-

tems. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 21 , 10340 –

10352 (2025). 

34. Environ documentation. https://envi-

ron.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html. 

35. Mathew, K., Kolluru, V. S. C. & Hennig, R. G. 

VASPsol: Implicit solvation and electrolyte 

model for density -functional theory. (2018) 

doi:10.5281/zenodo.2555053. 

36. Nishihara, S. & Otani, M. Hybrid solvation 

models for bulk, interface, and membrane: 

Reference interaction site methods coupled 

with density functional theory. Phys. Rev. B 96 ,

115429 (2017). 

37. Chuev, G. N. et al. A quasilinear RISM ap-

proach for the computation of solvation free 

energy of ionic species. Chem. Phys. Lett. 418 ,

485 –489 (2006). 

38. Bruch, N., Binninger, T., Huang, J. & Eikerling, 

M. Incorporating Electrolyte Correlation Ef-

fects into Variational Models of 

Electrochemical Interfaces. J. Phys. Chem. 

Lett. 15 , 2015 –2022 (2024). 

39. Bruch, N., Eikerling, M. & Binninger, T. Classi-

cal theory of electron -ion correlations at 

electrochemical interfaces: Closing the circuit 

from double -layer charging to ion adsorption. 

Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.14751 

(2025). 

40. Bruch, N., Binninger, T., Huang, J. & Eikerling, 

M. Variational functional in local density ap-

proximation for coulombic electrolyte EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 20 

correlations in the electric double layer. J. 

Chem. Phys. 162 , 224703 (2025). 

41. Huang, J., Chen, S. & Eikerling, M. Grand -Ca-

nonical Model of Electrochemical Double 

Layers from a Hybrid Density –Potential Func-

tional. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 17 , 2417 –

2430 (2021). 

42. Lehtola, S., Steigemann, C., Oliveira, M. J. T. & 

Marques, M. A. L. Recent developments in 

libxc — A comprehensive library of functionals 

for density functional theory. SoftwareX 7, 1 –5

(2018). 

43. Groß, A. & Sakong, S. Ab Initio Simulations of 

Water/Metal Interfaces. Chem. Rev. 122 ,

10746 –10776 (2022). 

44. Le, J., Cuesta, A. & Cheng, J. The structure of 

metal -water interface at the potential of zero 

charge from density functional theory -based 

molecular dynamics. J. Electroanal. Chem. 

819 , 87 –94 (2018). 

45. Le, J., Fan, Q., Perez -Martinez, L., Cuesta, A. & 

Cheng, J. Theoretical insight into the vibra-

tional spectra of metal –water interfaces from 

density functional theory based molecular dy-

namics. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 20 , 11554 –

11558 (2018). 

46. Heenen, H. H., Gauthier, J. A., KristoYersen, H. 

H., Ludwig, T. & Chan, K. Solvation at 

metal/water interfaces: An ab initio molecular 

dynamics benchmark of common computa-

tional approaches. J. Chem. Phys. 152 ,

144703 (2020). 

47. Dudzinski, A. M., Diesen, E., Heenen, H. H., 

Bukas, V. J. & Reuter, K. First Step of the Oxygen 

Reduction Reaction on Au(111): A Computa-

tional Study of O2 Adsorption at the Electrified 

Metal/Water Interface. ACS Catal. 13 , 12074 –

12081 (2023). 

48. Zhu, J. -X., Cheng, J. & DoblhoY -Dier, K. Dielec-

tric profile at the Pt(111)/water interface. J. 

Chem. Phys. 162 , 024702 (2025). 

49. Sun, M., Jin, B., Yang, X. & Xu, S. Probing nu-

clear quantum eYects in electrocatalysis via a 

machine -learning enhanced grand canonical 

constant potential approach. Nat. Commun. 

16 , 3600 (2025). 

50. Li, P., Huang, J., Hu, Y. & Chen, S. Establish-

ment of the Potential of Zero Charge of Metals 

in Aqueous Solutions: DiYerent Faces of Water 

Revealed by Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics 

Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. C 125 , 3972 –3979 

(2021). EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 21 

51. Kelly, S. R., Heenen, H. H., Govindarajan, N., 

Chan, K. & Nørskov, J. K. OH Binding Energy as 

a Universal Descriptor of the Potential of Zero 

Charge on Transition Metal Surfaces. J. Phys. 

Chem. C 126 , 5521 –5528 (2022). 

52. Le, J. -B., Fan, Q. -Y., Li, J. -Q. & Cheng, J. Molec-

ular origin of negative component of 

Helmholtz capacitance at electrified 

Pt(111)/water interface. Sci. Adv. 6, eabb1219 

(2020). 

53. Li, L., Liu, Y. -P., Le, J. -B. & Cheng, J. Unraveling 

molecular structures and ion eYects of elec-

tric double layers at metal water interfaces. 

Cell Rep. Phys. Sci. 100759 (2022) 

doi:10.1016/j.xcrp.2022.100759. 

54. Hagopian, A., Louisia, S., Boterman, K., Do-

blhoY -Dier, K. & Koper, M. T. M. Molecular 

Insights into the Double -Layer Capacitance of 

Platinum Surfaces in Alkaline Media. JACS Au 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1021/jac-

sau.5c01737 

doi:https://doi.org/10.1021/jacsau.5c01737. 

55. Lan, J., Rybkin, V. V. & Iannuzzi, M. Ionization of 

Water as an EYect of Quantum Delocalization 

at Aqueous Electrode Interfaces. J. Phys. 

Chem. Lett. 11 , 3724 –3730 (2020). 

56. Yan, L., Yamamoto, Y., Shiga, M. & Sugino, O. 

Nuclear quantum eYect for hydrogen adsorp-

tion on Pt(111). Phys. Rev. B 101 , 165414 

(2020). 

57. Dasgupta, S., Cassone, G. & Paesani, F. Nu-

clear Quantum EYects and the Grotthuss 

Mechanism Dictate the pH of Liquid Water. J. 

Phys. Chem. Lett. 16 , 2996 –3003 (2025). 

58. Zhu, K. et al. Enhanced Sampling in the Age of 

Machine Learning: Algorithms and Applica-

tions. Chem. Rev. 126 , 671 –713 (2026). 

59. Piccini, G. et al. Ab initio molecular dynamics 

with enhanced sampling in heterogeneous ca-

talysis. Catal. Sci. Technol. 12 , 12 –37 (2022). 

60. Bonati, L. et al. The role of dynamics in hetero-

geneous catalysis: Surface diYusivity and N2 

decomposition on Fe(111). Proc. Natl. Acad. 

Sci. 120 , e2313023120 (2023). 

61. Ojha, K., DoblhoY -Dier, K. & Koper, M. T. M. 

Double -layer structure of the Pt(111) –aque-

ous electrolyte interface. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 

119 , e2116016119 (2022). 

62. Zhang, Z. et al. Molecular understanding of the 

critical role of alkali metal cations in initiating 

CO2 electroreduction on Cu(100) surface. 

Nat. Commun. 15 , 612 (2024). EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 22 

63. Xi, C. et al. Distribution of alkali cations near 

the Cu (111) surface in aqueous solution. J. 

Mater. Chem. A 8, 24428 –24437 (2020). 

64. Yan, H. -M., Zhang, Z. & Wang, Y. -G. Coverage -

Induced Cation Dehydration and Migration for 

Enhanced CO –CO Coupling on Cu Electrocat-

alysts. ACS Catal. 14 , 3596 –3605 (2024). 

65. Qin, X., Vegge, T. & Hansen, H. A. Modulating 

Activity and Selectivity of CO2 Electroreduc-

tions at Au –Water Interfaces via Engineering 

Local Cation Condition. ACS Catal. 14 , 8168 –

8175 (2024). 

66. Diesen, E., Dudzinski, A. M., Reuter, K. & Bu-

kas, V. J. Origin of Electrocatalytic Selectivity 

during the Oxygen Reduction Reaction on 

Au(111). ACS Catal. 15 , 5403 –5411 (2025). 

67. Tran, B., Janik, M. J. & Milner, S. T. Hydration -

Shell Solvation and Screening Govern Alkali 

Cation Concentrations at Electrochemical In-

terfaces. J. Phys. Chem. C

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.4c05537 

(2024) doi:10.1021/acs.jpcc.4c05537. 

68. Chen, L. et al. Constant -Potential MD with 

Neural Network Potentials Reveals Cation Ef-

fects on CO2 Reduction at Au -Water 

Interfaces. JACS Au 

https://doi.org/10.1021/jacsau.5c01198 

(2025) doi:10.1021/jacsau.5c01198. 

69. Todorova, M., Wippermann, S. & Neugebauer, 

J. First -principles approaches and concepts to 

simulate electrochemical interfaces. Nat. Rev. 

Chem. 10 , 133 –146 (2026). 

70. Deißenbeck, F., Freysoldt, C., Todorova, M., 

Neugebauer, J. & Wippermann, S. Dielectric 

Properties of Nanoconfined Water: A Canoni-

cal Thermopotentiostat Approach. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 126 , 136803 (2021). 

71. Sun, M., Fu, L. & Xu, S. Electrochemical Poten-

tial Fluctuation Matters in Rate Constant 

Calculations for Proton -Coupled Electron 

Transfer. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 22 , 1539 –

1548 (2026). 

72. Bouzid, A. & Pasquarello, A. Atomic -Scale 

Simulation of Electrochemical Processes at 

Electrode/Water Interfaces under Referenced 

Bias Potential. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 9, 1880 –

1884 (2018). 

73. Taylor, C. D., Wasileski, S. A., Filhol, J. -S. & 

Neurock, M. First principles reaction modeling 

of the electrochemical interface: Considera-

tion and calculation of a tunable surface 

potential from atomic and electronic struc-

ture. Phys. Rev. B 73 , 165402 (2006). EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 23 

74. Zhao, X. & Liu, Y. Origin of Selective Production 

of Hydrogen Peroxide by Electrochemical Oxy-

gen Reduction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143 , 9423 –

9428 (2021). 

75. Urrego -Ortiz, R., Builes, S., Illas, F. & Calle -Val-

lejo, F. Gas -phase errors in computational 

electrocatalysis: a review. EES Catal. 2, 157 –

179 (2024). 

76. Chanussot, L. et al. Open Catalyst 2020 

(OC20) Dataset and Community Challenges. 

ACS Catal. 11 , 6059 –6072 (2021). 

77. Tran, R. et al. The Open Catalyst 2022 (OC22) 

Dataset and Challenges for Oxide Electrocat-

alysts. ACS Catal. 13 , 3066 –3084 (2023). 

78. Sahoo, S. J. et al. The Open Catalyst 2025 

(OC25) Dataset and Models for Solid -Liquid 

Interfaces. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2509.17862 

(2025). 

79. Zhuang, Y. -B. et al. An artificial intelligence ac-

celerated ab initio molecular dynamics 

dataset for electrochemical interfaces. Sci. 

Data 12 , 997 (2025). 

80. BEAST DB. https://beastdb.nrel.gov/. 

81. Tezak, C. et al. BEAST DB: Grand -Canonical 

Database of Electrocatalyst Properties. J. 

Phys. Chem. C 128 , 20165 –20176 (2024). 

82. Yang, M., Bonati, L., Polino, D. & Parrinello, M. 

Using metadynamics to build neural network 

potentials for reactive events: the case of urea 

decomposition in water. Catal. Today 387 ,

143 –149 (2022). 

83. Perego, S. & Bonati, L. Data eYicient machine 

learning potentials for modeling catalytic re-

activity via active learning and enhanced 

sampling. Npj Comput. Mater. 10 , 291 (2024). 

84. Kam, L. B. T. de, Zhu, J. -X., Mathanker, A., Do-

blhoY -Dier, K. & Govindarajan, N. 

Benchmarking short -range machine learning 

potentials for atomistic simulations of 

metal/electrolyte interfaces. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.22931 

(2026). 

85. Grimme, S., Antony, J., Ehrlich, S. & Krieg, H. A 

consistent and accurate ab initio parametriza-

tion of density functional dispersion 

correction (DFT -D) for the 94 elements H -Pu. J. 

Chem. Phys. 132 , 154104 (2010). 

86. Grasselli, F., Rossi, K., Gironcoli, S. de & Gris-

afi, A. Long -range electrostatics in atomistic 

machine learning: a physical perspective. Pre-

print at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.11071 

(2026). EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 24 

87. Behler, J. Four Generations of High -Dimen-

sional Neural Network Potentials. Chem. Rev. 

121 , 10037 –10072 (2021). 

88. Cheng, B. Latent Ewald summation for ma-

chine learning of long -range interactions. Npj 

Comput. Mater. 11 , 80 (2025). 

89. King, D. S., Kim, D., Zhong, P. & Cheng, B. Ma-

chine learning of charges and long -range 

interactions from energies and forces. Nat. 

Commun. 16 , 8763 (2025). 

90. Zhang, L. et al. A deep potential model with 

long -range electrostatic interactions. J. Chem. 

Phys. 156 , 124107 (2022). 

91. Zhu, J. -X. & Cheng, J. Machine Learning Poten-

tial for Electrochemical Interfaces with Hybrid 

Representation of Dielectric Response. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 135 , 018003 (2025). 

92. Chen, J. & Wang, T. DP χ: Constant -Potential 

Machine -Learning Potentials for Large -Scale 

Electrocatalysis. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv -2025 -

6vcnc (2025). 

93. Wang, X. et al. Ion -modulated structure, pro-

ton transfer, and capacitance in the 

Pt(111)/water electric double layer. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2509.13727 

(2025). 

94. Exner, K. S. Why the breaking of the OOH ver-

sus OH scaling relation might cause 

decreased electrocatalytic activity. Chem 

Catal. 1, 258 –271 (2021). 

95. Govindarajan, N., García -Lastra, J. M., Meijer, 

E. J. & Calle -Vallejo, F. Does the breaking of ad-

sorption -energy scaling relations guarantee 

enhanced electrocatalysis? Curr. Opin. Elec-

trochem. 8, 110 –117 (2018). 

96. Jovanov, Z. P. et al. Opportunities and chal-

lenges in the electrocatalysis of CO2 and CO 

reduction using bifunctional surfaces: A theo-

retical and experimental study of Au –Cd 

alloys. J. Catal. 343 , 215 –231 (2016). 

97. Kumeda, T., Laverdure, L., Honkala, K., Me-

lander, M. M. & Sakaushi, K. Cations 

Determine the Mechanism and Selectivity of 

Alkaline Oxygen Reduction Reaction on 

Pt(111). Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62 ,

e202312841 (2023). 

98. Johnson, M. S. et al. Pynta─An Automated 

Workflow for Calculation of Surface and Gas –

Surface Kinetics. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 63 ,

5153 –5168 (2023). 

99. Guan, Y., Ingman, V. M., Rooks, B. J. & Wheeler, 

S. E. AARON: An Automated Reaction EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 25 

Optimizer for New Catalysts. J. Chem. Theory 

Comput. 14 , 5249 –5261 (2018). 

100. Morandi, S. et al. An end -to -end framework for 

reactivity in heterogeneous catalysis. Nat. 

Chem. Eng. 3, 169 –180 (2026). 

101. Martínez -Núñez, E. et al. AutoMeKin2021: An 

open -source program for automated reaction 

discovery. J. Comput. Chem. 42 , 2036 –2048 

(2021). 

102. Wang, L. -P. et al. Discovering chemistry with 

an ab initio nanoreactor. Nat. Chem. 6, 1044 –

1048 (2014). 

103. Hashemi, A., Bougueroua, S., Gaigeot, M. -P. & 

Pidko, E. A. ReNeGate: A Reaction Network 

Graph -Theoretical Tool for Automated Mecha-

nistic Studies in Computational 

Homogeneous Catalysis. J. Chem. Theory 

Comput. 18 , 7470 –7482 (2022). 

104. Usama, M., Razzaq, S., Hättig, C., Steinmann, 

S. N. & Exner, K. S. Oxygen evolution reaction 

on IrO2(110) is governed by Walden -type 

mechanisms. Nat. Commun. 16 , 6137 (2025). 

105. Dhaka, K. & Exner, K. S. Degree of span control 

to determine the impact of diYerent mecha-

nisms and limiting steps: Oxygen evolution 

reaction over Co3O4(001) as a case study. J. 

Catal. 443 , 115970 (2025). 

106. Zhang, L., Zhao, D., Tang, W., Chen, Y. & 

Huang, J. Proton -Relaying Adsorbates Induce 

Non -Nernstian Behavior in Oxygen Reduction. 

ACS Catal. 15 , 14191 –14206 (2025). 

107. Chan, K. & Nørskov, J. K. Potential Depend-

ence of Electrochemical Barriers from ab Initio 

Calculations. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 7, 1686 –

1690 (2016). 

108. Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Gener-

alized Gradient Approximation Made Simple. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 , 3865 –3868 (1996). 

109. Hammer, B., Hansen, L. B. & Nørskov, J. K. Im-

proved adsorption energetics within density -

functional theory using revised Perdew -Burke -

Ernzerhof functionals. Phys. Rev. B 59 , 7413 –

7421 (1999). 

110. WellendorY, J. et al. Density functionals for 

surface science: Exchange -correlation model 

development with Bayesian error estimation. 

Phys. Rev. B 85 , 235149 (2012). 

111. Cao, H., Lv, X., Qian, S., Li, J. & Wang, Y. -G. 

Constant Potential Thermodynamic Integra-

tion for Obtaining the Free Energy Profile of 

Electrochemical Reaction. J. Phys. Chem. 

Lett. 15 , 1314 –1320 (2024). 

112. Mathew, K., Kolluru, V. S. C., Mula, S., Stein-

mann, S. N. & Hennig, R. G. Implicit self -EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 26 

consistent electrolyte model in plane -wave 

density -functional theory. J. Chem. Phys. 151 ,

234101 (2019). 

113. Santos, E. & Schmickler, W. On the timescale 

of electrochemical processes. Electrochimica 

Acta 498 , 144659 (2024). 

114. Melander, M. M. Frozen or dynamic? — An at-

omistic simulation perspective on the 

timescales of electrochemical reactions. 

Electrochimica Acta 446 , 142095 (2023). 

115. Zhang, M., Chen, Y., Melander, M. M. & Huang, 

J. Electrochemical Electron Transfer: Key Con-

cepts, Theories, and Parameterization via 

Atomistic Simulations. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2510.24635 

(2025). 

116. Kastlunger, G., Vijay, S., Chen, X., Sharma, S. & 

Peterson, A. On the Thermodynamic Equiva-

lence of Grand Canonical, Infinite -Size, and 

Capacitor -Based Models in First -Principle 

Electrochemistry. ChemPhysChem 25 ,

e202300950 (2024). 

117. Hörmann, N. G., Beinlich, S. D. & Reuter, K. 

Converging Divergent Paths: Constant Charge 

vs Constant Potential Energetics in Computa-

tional Electrochemistry. J. Phys. Chem. C 128 ,

5524 –5531 (2024). 

118. Hanselman, S., Koper, M. T. M. & Calle -Vallejo, 

F. Using micro -solvation and generalized coor-

dination numbers to estimate the solvation 

energies of adsorbed hydroxyl on metal nano-

particles. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 25 , 3211 –

3219 (2023). 

119. Rendón -Calle, A., Builes, S. & Calle -Vallejo, F. 

Substantial improvement of electrocatalytic 

predictions by systematic assessment of sol-

vent eYects on adsorption energies. Appl. 

Catal. B Environ. 276 , 119147 (2020). 

120. Romeo, E., Lezana -Muralles, M. F., Illas, F. & 

Calle -Vallejo, F. Extracting Features of Active 

Transition Metal Electrodes for NO Electrore-

duction with Catalytic Matrices. ACS Appl. 

Mater. Interfaces 15 , 22176 –22183 (2023). 

121. Oudot, B. & DoblhoY -Dier, K. Reaction barriers 

at metal surfaces computed using the random 

phase approximation: Can we beat DFT in the 

generalized gradient approximation? J. Chem. 

Phys. 161 , 054708 (2024). 

122. Tchakoua, T., Gerrits, N., Smeets, E. W. F. & 

Kroes, G. -J. SBH17: Benchmark Database of 

Barrier Heights for Dissociative Chemisorp-

tion on Transition Metal Surfaces. J. Chem. 

Theory Comput. 19 , 245 –270 (2023). EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 27 

123. Duanmu, K. & Truhlar, D. G. Validation of Den-

sity Functionals for Adsorption Energies on 

Transition Metal Surfaces. J. Chem. Theory 

Comput. 13 , 835 –842 (2017). 

124. Garza, A. J., Bell, A. T. & Head -Gordon, M. 

Nonempirical Meta -Generalized Gradient Ap-

proximations for Modeling Chemisorption at 

Metal Surfaces. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 14 ,

3083 –3090 (2018). 

125. Mallikarjun Sharada, S., Karlsson, R. K. B., 

Maimaiti, Y., Voss, J. & Bligaard, T. Adsorption 

on transition metal surfaces: Transferability 

and accuracy of DFT using the ADS41 dataset. 

Phys. Rev. B 100 , 035439 (2019). 

126. Araujo, R. B., Rodrigues, G. L. S., dos Santos, 

E. C. & Pettersson, L. G. M. Adsorption ener-

gies on transition metal surfaces: towards an 

accurate and balanced description. Nat. 

Commun. 13 , 6853 (2022). 

127. Mallikarjun Sharada, S., Bligaard, T., Luntz, A. 

C., Kroes, G. -J. & Nørskov, J. K. SBH10: A 

Benchmark Database of Barrier Heights on 

Transition Metal Surfaces. J. Phys. Chem. C 

121 , 19807 –19815 (2017). 

128. Smeets, E. W. F. & Kroes, G. -J. Performance of 

Made Simple Meta -GGA Functionals with 

rVV10 Nonlocal Correlation for H2 + Cu(111), 

D2 + Ag(111), H2 + Au(111), and D2 + Pt(111). 

J. Phys. Chem. C 125 , 8993 –9010 (2021). 

129. Gerrits, N. et al. Density Functional Theory for 

Molecule –Metal Surface Reactions: When 

Does the Generalized Gradient Approximation 

Get It Right, and What to Do If It Does Not. J. 

Phys. Chem. Lett. 11 , 10552 –10560 (2020). 

130. Mardirossian, N. & Head -Gordon, M. Thirty 

years of density functional theory in computa-

tional chemistry: an overview and extensive 

assessment of 200 density functionals. Mol. 

Phys. 115 , 2315 –2372 (2017). 

131. Zapata, J. F., Urrego -Ortiz, R., Builes, S. & 

Calle -Vallejo, F. Halogen Thermochemistry As-

sessed with Density Functional Theory: 

Systematic Errors, Swift Corrections and Ef-

fects on Electrochemistry. ChemSusChem 18 ,

e202402189 (2025). 

132. Urrego -Ortiz, R., Builes, S. & Calle -Vallejo, F. 

Automated versus Chemically Intuitive De-

convolution of Density Functional Theory 

(DFT) -Based Gas -Phase Errors in Nitrogen 

Compounds. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 61 , 13375 –

13382 (2022). 

133. Tayyebi, E. & Exner, K. S. Understanding Free -

Energy Landscapes in Electrocatalysis: AEU -CONCERT position paper Page | 28 

Case Study on Nitrate Reduction over Au(111). 

ACS Electrochem. 1, 910 –920 (2025). 

134. Aguado -Ruiz, I., Urrego -Ortiz, R. & Calle -Val-

lejo, F. A computational view on the 

thermochemical and electrochemical stabil-

ity of ruthenium oxides. J. Mater. Chem. A 13 ,

12482 –12491 (2025). 

135. Sargeant, E., Illas, F., Rodríguez, P. & Calle -Val-

lejo, F. On the shifting peak of volcano plots for 

oxygen reduction and evolution. Electro-

chimica Acta 426 , 140799 (2022). 

136. Christensen, R., Hansen, H. A., Dickens, C. F., 

Nørskov, J. K. & Vegge, T. Functional Independ-

ent Scaling Relation for ORR/OER Catalysts. J. 

Phys. Chem. C 120 , 24910 –24916 (2016). 

137. Christensen, R., Hansen, H. A. & Vegge, T. 

Identifying systematic DFT errors in catalytic 

reactions. Catal. Sci. Technol. 5, 4946 –4949 

(2015). 

138. Romeo, E. et al. Improving the Description of 

Adsorbed Hydroxyl to Make Predictive Cata-

lytic Activity Models. ACS Catal. 15 , 18004 –

18012 (2025). 

139. Urrego -Ortiz, R. et al. Correcting Errors in the 

Adsorbed Intermediates of CO2 Electroreduc-

tion. Carbon Energy 8, e70128 (2026). 

140. Kroes, G. -J. Computational approaches to dis-

sociative chemisorption on metals: towards 

chemical accuracy. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 

23 , 8962 –9048 (2021). 

141. Le, J., Iannuzzi, M., Cuesta, A. & Cheng, J. De-

termining Potentials of Zero Charge of Metal 

Electrodes versus the Standard Hydrogen 

Electrode from Density -Functional -Theory -

Based Molecular Dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

119 , 016801 (2017). 

142. Zhu, J. -X., Le, J. -B., Koper, M. T. M., DoblhoY -

Dier, K. & Cheng, J. EYects of Adsorbed OH on 

Pt(100)/Water Interfacial Structures and Po-

tential. J. Phys. Chem. C 125 , 21571 –21579 

(2021). 

143. Le, J. -B. et al. Modeling Electrified Pt(111) -

Had/Water Interfaces from Ab Initio Molecular 

Dynamics. JACS Au 1, 569 –577 (2021). 

144. Khatib, R., Kumar, A., Sanvito, S., Sulpizi, M. & 

Cucinotta, C. S. The nanoscale structure of 

the Pt -water double layer under bias revealed. 

Electrochimica Acta 391 , 138875 (2021). 

145. Wan, P., Chen, Y. & Tang, Q. Electrochemical 

Stability of MXenes in Water Based on Con-

stant Potential AIMD Simulations. 

ChemPhysChem 25 , e202400325 (2024). EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 29 

146. Buraschi, M., Horsfield, A. P. & Cucinotta, C. S. 

Revealing Interface Polarization EYects on the 

Electrical Double Layer with EYicient Open 

Boundary Simulations under Potential Con-

trol. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 15 , 4872 –4879 

(2024). 

147. Ahart, C. S., Chulkov, S. K. & Cucinotta, C. S. 

Enabling Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics under 

Bias: The CP2K+SMEAGOL Interface for Inte-

grating Density Functional Theory and Non -

Equilibrium Green Functions. J. Chem. Theory 

Comput. 20 , 6772 –6780 (2024). 

148. Stengel, M. & Spaldin, N. A. Ab initio theory of 

metal -insulator interfaces in a finite electric 

field. Phys. Rev. B 75 , 205121 (2007). 

149. Andersson, L., Sprik, M., Hutter, J. & Zhang, C. 

Electronic Response and Charge Inversion at 

Polarized Gold Electrode. Angew. Chem. Int. 

Ed. 64 , e202413614 (2025). 

150. Otani, M. & Sugino, O. First -principles calcula-

tions of charged surfaces and interfaces: A 

plane -wave nonrepeated slab approach. 

Phys. Rev. B 73 , 115407 (2006). 

151. Tian, X. et al. Electrochemical potential -driven 

water dynamics control CO2 electroreduction 

at the Ag/H2O interface. Nat. Commun. 16 ,

10636 (2025). 

152. Fu, L. et al. Electrochemistry -Enhanced Dy-

namic Paths Sampling Unveiling Nuclear 

Quantum EYects in Electrocatalysis. Preprint 

at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.16807 

(2025). 

153. Bianchi, M. G. et al. Electrochemical Inter-

faces at Constant Potential: Data -EYicient 

Transfer Learning for Machine -Learning -Based 

Molecular Dynamics. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2511.19338 

(2025). 

154. Novelli, P. et al. Fast and Fourier features for 

transfer learning of interatomic potentials. Npj 

Comput. Mater. 11 , 293 (2025). 

155. Wang, R., Fang, S., Huang, Q. & Liu, Y. Con-

stant -Potential Machine Learning Force Field 

for the Electrochemical Interface. J. Chem. 

Theory Comput. 21 , 7628 –7635 (2025). 

156. Chen, X. et al. Atomistic learning in the elec-

tronically grand -canonical ensemble. Npj 

Comput. Mater. 9, 73 (2023). 

157. Zhou, J., Fu, Y., Liu, L. & Liu, C. Constant -Po-

tential Machine Learning Molecular Dynamics 

Simulations Reveal Potential -Regulated Cu 

Cluster Formation on MoS2. J. Phys. Chem. C 

129 , 6414 –6422 (2025). EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 30 

158. Bergmann, N., Bonnet, N., Marzari, N., Reuter, 

K. & Hörmann, N. G. Machine Learning the En-

ergetics of Electrified Solid -Liquid Interfaces. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 135 , (2025). 

159. Siepmann, J. I. & Sprik, M. Influence of surface 

topology and electrostatic potential on wa-

ter/electrode systems. J. Chem. Phys. 102 ,

511 –524 (1995). 

160. Unke, O. T. et al. SpookyNet: Learning force 

fields with electronic degrees of freedom and 

nonlocal eYects. Nat. Commun. 12 , 7273 

(2021). 

161. Singh, M. R., Goodpaster, J. D., Weber, A. Z., 

Head -Gordon, M. & Bell, A. T. Mechanistic in-

sights into electrochemical reduction of CO 2

over Ag using density functional theory and 

transport models. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114 ,

E8812 –E8821 (2017). 

162. Monteiro, M. C. O. et al. Time -Resolved Local 

pH Measurements during CO2 Reduction Us-

ing Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy: 

BuYering and Tip EYects. JACS Au 1, 1915 –

1924 (2021). 

163. Monteiro, M. C. O., Liu, X., Hagedoorn, B. J. L., 

Snabilié, D. D. & Koper, M. T. M. Interfacial pH 

Measurements Using a Rotating Ring -Disc 

Electrode with a Voltammetric pH Sensor. 

ChemElectroChem 9, e202101223 (2022). 

164. Rodriguez -Acosta, J. W. et al. The Role of Local 

pH in Electrocatalysis: Measurement, Impact, 

and Control Strategies. ACS Electrochem. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acselectro-

chem.5c00489 (2026) 

doi:10.1021/acselectrochem.5c00489. 

165. Zhang, Z., Zandkarimi, B. & Alexandrova, A. N. 

Ensembles of Metastable States Govern Het-

erogeneous Catalysis on Dynamic Interfaces. 

Acc. Chem. Res. 53 , 447 –458 (2020). 

166. Wu, H. & Zhang, J. Dynamic restructuring of 

electrocatalysts in the activation of small mol-

ecules: challenges and opportunities. Chem. 

Commun. 61 , 2190 –2202 (2025). 

167. Rossmeisl, J., Nørskov, J. K., Taylor, C. D., Janik, 

M. J. & Neurock, M. Calculated Phase Dia-

grams for the Electrochemical Oxidation and 

Reduction of Water over Pt(111). J. Phys. 

Chem. B 110 , 21833 –21839 (2006). 

168. Ciotti, A. & García -Melchor, M. The importance 

of surface coverages in the rational design of 

electrocatalysts. Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 42 ,

101402 (2023). 

169. Surendralal, S., Todorova, M., Finnis, M. W. & 

Neugebauer, J. First -Principles Approach to EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 31 

Model Electrochemical Reactions: Under-

standing the Fundamental Mechanisms 

behind Mg Corrosion. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 ,

246801 (2018). 

170. Viola, A. et al. Influence of the Size and Shape 

of Palladium Nanoparticles on Their Electro-

chemical Hydrogen Sorption Capacity. J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 148 , 9548 –9562 (2026). 

171. Ngoipala, A. et al. Hydride -Induced Recon-

struction of Pd Electrode Surfaces: A

Combined Computational and Experimental 

Study. Adv. Mater. 37 , 2410951 (2025). 

172. Peng, J. Toward data -driven predictive model-

ing of electrocatalyst stability and surface 

reconstruction. J. Chem. Phys. 163 , 040902 

(2025). 

173. Atlan, C. et al. Probing Strain in Individual Pal-

ladium Nanocrystals during 

Electrochemically Induced Phase Transitions. 

J. Am. Chem. Soc. 147 , 25417 –25428 (2025). 

174. Dhaka, K. et al. Trends in Oxygen Evolution Re-

action Activity and Limiting Steps for DiYerent 

Active Sites on Co3O4(001). ChemCatChem 

17 , e00992 (2025). 

175. Persson, K. A., Waldwick, B., Lazic, P. & Ceder, 

G. Prediction of solid -aqueous equilibria: 

Scheme to combine first -principles 

calculations of solids with experimental aque-

ous states. Phys. Rev. B 85 , 235438 (2012). 

176. Singh, A. K. et al. Electrochemical Stability of 

Metastable Materials. Chem. Mater. 29 ,

10159 –10167 (2017). 

177. Du, X. et al. Accelerating and Enhancing Ther-

modynamic Simulations of Electrochemical 

Interfaces. ACS Cent. Sci. 11 , 1558 –1572 

(2025). 

178. Li, D. et al. Unraveling the Potential -Depend-

ent Selectivity of Propylene Electrooxidation: 

The Role of Electrochemistry -Induced Recon-

struction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 147 , 24900 –

24912 (2025). 

179. Schmidt, T. O. et al. Elucidation of Structure –

Activity Relations in Proton Electroreduction 

at Pd Surfaces: Theoretical and Experimental 

Study. Small 18 , 2202410 (2022). 

180. Lipin, R. & Vandichel, M. Modeling Metal Elec-

trocatalysts as Cathodes: The Urgent Need to 

Look Beneath the Surface. ACS Energy Lett. 

10 , 5880 –5884 (2025). 

181. Wang, S. & Guo, J. Revealing the Kinetic -Driven 

Oxygen Reduction Reaction Using Grand Ca-

nonical Ensemble Modeling. J. Phys. Chem. C 

129 , 10507 –10517 (2025). EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 32 

182. Fuchs, T. et al. Anodic and Cathodic Platinum 

Dissolution Processes Involve DiYerent Oxide 

Species. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62 ,

e202304293 (2023). 

183. Fuchs, T. et al. Structure dependency of the 

atomic -scale mechanisms of platinum 

electro -oxidation and dissolution. Nat. Catal. 

3, 754 –761 (2020). EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 33 

# Supporting Information: 

# Atomistic Modeling for Elec-

# tro -chemical Reactions 

K. DoblhoY -Dier, B. Ballotta, L. Bonati, V. J. Bukas, F. Calle -Vallejo, C. S. Cucinotta, K. S. Exner, M. García -Mel-

chor, L. Giordano, K. Honkala, N. Hörmann, G. Kastlunger, M.M. Melander, Zehra B. Öcal, A. A. Reka, S. 

Steinmann, M. Vandichel, J. -X. Zhu, G . Cicero 

Throughout the position paper, we consolidated the viewpoints expressed during the first online meeting of the 

COST Action EU -CONCERT while articulating a clear vision for the consortium. EU -CONCERT members had 

the possibility to endorse the paper thereby showing their involvement in the original discussions as well as 

their support of the viewpoint. We provide a list of endorsers from the COST Action EU -CONCERT below. The 

information printed was provided by the endorsers in an endorsement form. 

Çağla Akkol; Karadeniz Technical University, Department of Chemistry 

Alexander Bagger ; Technical University of Denmark 

Oğuz Bayındır ; Istanbul Health and Technology University, Türkiye 

Otavio Beruski ; Hyet Hydrogen, The Netherlands 

Michele G. Bianchi ; Politecnico di Torino 

Conor Brennan -Pollak ; Trinity College Dublin, Ireland 

Hasan Celik ; University of Cukurova, Turkiye 

Hilal Demir Kivrak; Eskisehir Osmangazi University , E skisehir Tukiye 

Francesca Fasulo ; University of Naples Federico II 

Didac A Fenoll ; CIC energiGUNE, Spain 

Arianit Withdrawal Gashi ; University for Business and Technology -UBT 

Ralph Gebauer ; ICTP, Italy 

José R. B. Gomes ; CICECO -Aveiro Institute of Materials, University of Aveiro, Portugal 

Nitish Govindarajan ; NTU Singapore 

Axel Groß ; Ulm University, Germany 

Hajar Hajar Hajar Mahmoudi ; Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie per l'Energia e la Mobilità Sostenibili (STEMS) EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 34 

Ehsan Hajialilou ; IMDEA Energy, Madrid, Spain 

Joakim Halldin Stenlid ; Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chalmers University of Techno-

logy 

Hendrik H. Heenen ; Fritz -Haber -Institut der Max -Planck -Gesellschaft 

Matej Huš ; National Institute of Chemistry 

Vladislav Ivanistsev ; University of Latvia 

Faruk Karadag ; Türkiye 

Dogan K aya; Department of Physics, Faculty of Science and Arts, Department of Advanced Materials and Na-

notechnology, Institute of Natural and Applied Sciences Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey 

Mehmet Fatih Kaya ; Erciyes University, Energy Systems Engineering Dept., Heat Eng. Division, Kayseri, Türkiye 

Ziad Khalifa; The British University in Egypt, Egypt 

Karolina Kordek -Khalil ; Wrocław University of Science and Technology 

Raju Lipin ; University of Limerick, Ireland 

Mirtha A. O. Lourenço ; CICECO – Aveiro Institute of Materials, University of Aveiro, Portugal 

Milan Z Momčilović ; University of Niš, Serbia 

Mohammed Azeezulla Nazrulla ; National Institute of Chemistry 

Aligholi N iaei; Türkiye 

Igor A Pašti ; University of Belgrade - Faculty of Physical Chemistry, Serbia 

Anup Paul ; Portalegre Polytechnic University, Portalegre, Portugal 

Daniela Polino ; SUPSI, Lugano 

Alvaro Posada -Borbón ; Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden 

Michele Re Fiorentin ; Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy 

Karsten Reuter ; Fritz -Haber -Institut der MPG 

Francesca Risplendi ; Department of Applied Science and Technology, Politecnico di Torino 

Kevin Rossi ; TU Delft 

Adriano Sacco ; Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia 

Esther Santos ; APRIA SYSTEMS SL 

Nicola Seriani ; ICTP, Italy 

Setareh Orangpour ; Germany 

Anton Stasyuk ; INMA (CSIC -UNIZAR) 

Muhammad Umer ; University of Limerick EU -CONCERT position paper Page | 35 

Francesc Viñes ; University of Barcelona, Spain 

Alexander D. von Rueden ; Fritz Haber Institute of 

the Max Planck Society, Germany 

Robin J. White ; Luxembourg Institute of Science & 

Technology 

Cem Burak Yildiz ; Bartin University, Türkiye